Chronology

1947:  Simone de Beauvoir tours the United States, January to May.  Truman Doctrine announced, March 12, followed by federal loyalty oath program, March 21. Left-leaning Congress of American Women (CAW) named on the Attorney General’s List of Subversive Organizations. George Kennan’s article, “The Sources of Soviet Conduct,” appears in Foreign Affairs under byline “X”. India and Pakistan gain independence from Britain. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists begins estimating danger of nuclear war with its “Doomsday Clock.” Jackie Robinson, joining the Brooklyn Dodgers, breaks the color bar in Major League Baseball.  Mont Pèlerin Society formed in Switzerland to promote “neoliberalism.”  Tennesee Williams’s A Streetcar Named Desire wins the Pulitzer.  Jackson Pollock begins large “all-over” abstract paintings. Paul and Percival Goodman publish Communitas: Means of Livelihood and Ways of Life.  Erich Fromm’s Man for Himself introduces psychoanalytical revisionism to a lay audience.

1948:  Czechoslovak Communists take power in coup.  American GI Forum founded in Corpus Christi, Texas, March, to assure equality for Mexican-American veterans. Marshall Plan authorized, April. Establishment of the State of Israel, May 14. Berlin Airlift begins. Auden’s long poem, The Age of Anxiety, wins the Pulitzer Prize. Norman Mailer publishes his first novel, about soldiers in the Pacific war, The Naked and the Dead.  Richard Hofstadter’s The American Political Tradition decries the narrow limits of political debate throughout US history. Thomas Merton’s autobiography, The Seven Storey Mountain, traces his conversion from a modern, self-centered life to monastic devotion in a Trappist monastery. Alfred Kinsey’s Sexual Behavior in the Human Male published. Poet Ruth Herschberger publishes an attack on male domination and misogynist myths in Adam’s Rib.   Founder of National Association of Colored Women, Mary Church Terrell successfully sues the Washington, D.C. chapter of the American Association of University Women for membership. Harvard’s Russian Research Center established under Clyde Kluckhohn’s leadership. The RAND corporation begins its work as a Defense Department contractor in engaging American scholars in “strategic studies.”  UN General Assembly approves Universal Declaration of Human Rights, drafting  committee chaired by Eleanor Roosevelt.  Julian Beck and Judith Malina launch the Living Theatre company.  Composer John Cage, dancer and choreographer Merce Cunningham and designer Buckminister Fuller attend Black Mountain College’s summer art institute in Asheville, N.C.  
1949: Arthur Schlesinger makes the case for anticommunist liberalism in The Vital Center.  Jackson Pollock’s Number 1,1948 exhibited.  The Cultural and Scientific Conference for World Peace at the Waldorf Astoria hotel, New York, assailed by anti-Stalinists for defending the Soviet regime.  NATO established, April.   USSR explodes its first atomic bomb, August. Arthur Miller’s Death of a Salesman wins Pulitzer for drama; William Faulkner wins Nobel Prize.  Renowned author Pearl Buck, along with Esland Robeson, wife of controversial singer Paul Robeson, publish a co-authored antiracist book, An American Argument.  The musical South Pacific, by Richard Rodgers and world federalist Oscar Hammerstein II, appears on Broadway.  Bollingen Prize to Ezra Pound sparks debate over literature and politics. Dwight Macdonald closes his journal of independent radicalism, politics. Aldo Leopold’s A Sand County Almanac promotes conservation as “a state of harmony between men and land.”  Eighth Street Club formed in New York as a site for lectures and discussions among modern artists and intellectuals.  Yokohama, California, the first collection of short stories by a Japanese American writer, is published by Toshio Mori, a wartime internee.  Muriel Rukeyser argues for the meeting of art and science in The Life of Poetry.
1950:  Former diplomat and accused spy Alger Hiss receives jail sentence after conviction for perjury.  In a Lincoln Day speech, Senator Joseph McCarthy denounces Dean Acheson for harboring known Communist Party members in the State Department, February; McCarthy baselessly labels Johns Hopkins scholar of East Asia, Owen Lattimore, “the top Soviet spy” in the United States, March; Maine Senator Margaret Chase Smith denounces McCarthy for promoting “Fear, Ignorance, Bigotry and Smear,” June.  American Studies pioneer F. O. Matthiessen commits suicide.  Korean War begins June 25. Anticommunist intellectuals convene the Congress for Cultural Freedom (CCF) in Berlin, June 26.  Gwendolyn Brooks wins Pulitzer Prize, the first African American author to do so, for her book of poetry, Annie Allen.  Major works of American social science include Erik Erikson’s Childhood and Society; David Riesman’s The Lonely Crowd; and Theodor Adorno et al., The Authoritarian Personality.  Harry Hay founds the “homophile” organization, the Mattachine Society, in Los Angeles.  “Neoliberal” Friedrich Hayek joins the Committee on Social Thought, University of Chicago, where he collaborates with free-market economist Milton Friedman. Lionel Trilling’s collection, The Liberal Imagination, establishes him as a leading cultural critic and moralist.  Black Mountain poet Charles Olson publishes “Projective Verse,” a manifesto for a new poetry of open composition based on the “laws and possibilities of the breath.”  Poet, critic, and lay therapist Paul Goodman and émigré psychiatrist Frederick Perls debut Gestalt Therapy in collaboration with Ralph Hefferline.
1951:  North Korean forces are expelled from southern capital of Seoul, March, establishing Korean War stalemate near the 38th parallel; Truman dismisses Gen. Douglass MacArthur as Korean War commander, April; in response, McCarthy denounces Defense Secretary George C. Marshall as part of “a conspiracy so immense,” June.  The “Ninth Street Show” in New York, May-June, marks a collective debut of works by Jackson Pollock, Joan Mitchell, Elaine and Willem de Kooning, Hans Hoffmann, Lee Krasner, David Smith and other abstract artists.  J. D. Salinger’s Catcher in the Rye published.  Hannah Arendt’s The Origins of Totalitarianism explores the “radical evil” represented by the Nazi and Stalinist regimes.  Japanese scholar D. T. Suzuki, tours US universities, begins lecturing at Columbia University, to introduce Zen Buddhism to American audiences. Donald Webster Cory (pen name of Edward Sagarin) makes a case for gay self-assertion in Homosexual in America.  Robert Rauschenberg creates his minimalist White Paintings. Photographer Hans Namuth releases his film, Jackson Pollock, with a score by composer of “indeterminate music,” Morton Feldman.  U.S.A.: The Permanent Revolution, hailing the postwar advent of a new, productive and inclusive American capitalism, published.  Bishop Fulton Sheen’s Life is Worth Living debuts on the DuMont television network.
1952:  John Dewey dies at age 92, June 1. Ralph Ellison’s Invisible Man published.  Partisan Review convenes symposium, “Our Country, Our Culture,” May-October.  Philosopher Sidney Hook defends the exclusion of Communists from university faculties in his book, Heresy, Yes—Conspiracy, No!  Hiss accuser Whittaker Chambers publishes his memoir, Witness, portraying a Manichean world struggle between Christian faith and Communism.  Reinhold Niebuhr’s The Irony of American History offers a Christian “realist” perspective on the hubris and innocence of US politics and diplomacy. McCarren-Walter Immigration Act ends ban on naturalization of non-white immigrants, retains national-origins quota system.  At Black Mountain College near Asheville, N.C., composer John Cage and choreographer Merce Cunningham stage the multi-media performance, Theatre Piece No. 1, anticipating Allan Kaprow’s “Happenings.”  John Cage’s 4’33’’ premiered by pianist David Tudor in Woodstock, New YorkWillem de Kooning’s Woman 1 exhibited; Harold Rosenberg’s essay, “The American Action Painters,” advances an anti-formalist understanding of the Abstract Expressionists.  Paul Tillich’s The Courage to Be appears, a classic of existentialist Christianity. Fred Zinnemann’s controversial Western, High Noon released.
1953:  Arthur Miller’s Crucible, a play about the 1692 Salem witch trials intended as an analogy to the Red Scare, premieres in New York City.  Christine Jorgensen returns to New York after sex-reassignment surgery in Denmark.  Simone d Beauvoir’s The Second Sex published in English.  Stalin dies, March.  Congress begins “termination” policy, ending federal recognition of Indian tribal governments and treaty obligations in selected cases.  Julius and Ethel Rosenberg executed, June 19.  Korean armistice signed July 27.  US-sponsored coup deposes Iran premier Mohammad Mosaddegh.  Alfred Kinsey’s Sexual Behavior in the Human Female published.  Merce Cunningham Dance Company formed at Black Mountain College summer art institute.  Dancer Anna Halprin choreographs her improvisational work, People on a Slant, in San Francisco.  Russell Kirk publishes his “traditionalist” treatise, The Conservative Mind.
1954:  Irving Howe and Lewis Coser start Dissent magazine as an organ of “democratic socialism.”  US explodes its first effective hydrogen bomb, Bikini atoll, some 250 miles east of Enewetok, March.  Atomic Energy Commission revokes the security clearance of physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer due to accusations of communist affiliations, April.  Supreme Court’s Brown v. Board decision rules school segregation unconstitutional, May.   Senate hearings pitting Joseph McCarthy against the U.S. Army are televised, April-June.  Billie Holiday, Lester Young, and Dizzy Gillespie headline the first Newport Jazz Festival, Newport, Rhode Island, July 17-18.  Elvis Presley’s version of the Arthur Crudup song, “That’s All Right,” released by Sun Records, Memphis, July 19.  William H. Sheldon’s Atlas of Men: A Guide of Somatotyping the Adult Male identifies standard body shapes with personality types.  Robert Rauschenberg begins his “combine” works of painting and found objects.  Jasper Johns creates his iconic Flag using oil paint, encaustic, and newspaper collage. Joseph McCarthy censured by the Senate, December.
1955:  Bebop innovator, jazz saxophonist Charlie Parker, dies March 12.  Afro-Asia Conference, Bandung, Indonesia, April 18-24, marks debut of new states soon to be known as “the third world.”  The Supreme Court’s “Brown II” decision calls for implementation of the desegregation decision “with all deliberate speed.” Fourteen-year old Emmett Till murdered in Money, Mississippi, August 28; buried September 6 in Illinois after open-casket funeral attended by tens of thousands in Chicago.  Allen Ginsberg gives first public reading of Howl at San Francisco’s Six Gallery. The arrest of activist Rosa Parks ignites the Montgomery bus boycott, beginning December 5.  Louis Hartz’s The Liberal Tradition in America and Richard Hofstadter’s The Age of Reform.  Pauline Kael, one of the new crop of American film critics, begins broadcasting movie reviews on pacifist-run, listener-sponsored San Francisco radio station KPFA. William F. Buckley founds National Review. Photography exhibit, The Family of Man, curated by Edward Steichen, opens at the Museum of Modern Art. Will Herberg’s Protestant, Catholic, Jew critically examines religious assimilation. Women’s “homophile” organization, Daughters of Bilitis, founded in San Francisco.  Chuck Berry’s “Maybelline” and Little Richard’s “Tutti Frutti” help convert “rhythm and blues” into “rock ‘n’ roll.”  Pruitt-Igoe housing project completed in St. Louis.  Dorothy Day and A.J. Muste participate in protest of civil defense drill in New York.  Flannery O’Connor, A Good Man is Hard to Find and Other Stories.  Marianne Moore, a leader of modern poetry since the 1920s, elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters, one of only three women members.
1956:  Khrushchev’s “Secret Speech” to the 20th Congress of the Soviet Communist Party acknowledges the crimes of the Stalin regime.  Blacklisted Filipino American writer Carlos Bulosan dies in Seattle, age 42.  Israel, Britain and France attack Egypt, October 29, in attempt to retake the Suez Canal from Gamal Abdel Nasser’s government.  Soviet military suppresses revolt in Hungary, beginning November 4.  Montgomery bus boycott ends with elimination of segregation on the city’s busses, December.  W. H. Whyte’s The Organization Man popularizes critique of American conformity.  Anarcho-pacifist magazine, Liberation, begins publishing.  C. Wright Mills’s The Power Elite analyses the concentration of power, held by coordinated elites in big business, government, and the military, as the key feature of postwar US society.  Pragmatist philosopher Charles Frankel’s The Case for Modern Man seeks to reinvigorate reformist liberal philosophy. Elizabeth Bishop wins the Pulitzer Prize for poetry.  Committee for Nuclear Information, led by biologist Barry Commoner at Washington University, St. Louis, publicizes dangers stemming from nuclear fall-out. James Baldwin’s second novel, Giovanni’s Room, dramatizes a gay romance.
1957:  Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) formed.  Martin Luther King, Jr. travels to Ghana for ceremonies marking the first new independent African independent state south of the Sahara, March.  Supreme Court’s “Roth” decision begins to lift literary censorship of literary works previously deemed “obscene.” Committee for Non-Violent Action (CNVA) starts protesting the nuclear arms race through civil disobedience at nuclear testing sites. Arkansas NAACP president Daisy Bates promotes the desegregation of Little Rock’s Central High School; ultimately Pres. Eisenhower dispatches of federal troops to protect the Bates group of black students from racist mobs.  Jack Kerouac’s On the Road gives the “Beat” writers more exposure.  John Okada’s novel, No-No Boy, tells the story of a Japanese American resister to wartime internment. West Side Story premiers on Broadway, September.  Soviet launch of Sputnik satellite stuns US policy makers. Psychologist Evelyn Hooker publishes her first work challenging the medical diagnosis of homosexuality as a sickness. Miles Davis’s album Birth of the Cool (with Bill Evans) released, initiating a series of stylistic innovations in jazz.  Norman Mailer’s “The White Negro” prompts controversy over Mailer’s romanticizing of black “hipsters.” Ayn Rand’s novel, Atlas Shrugged, commences the propagation of Rand’s doctrine of “Objectivism.”
1958:  Lorraine Hansberry’s A Raisin in the Sun premiers on Broadway; named “Best Play” of the year by New York Drama Critics’ Circle.  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) established.  Frank Lloyd Wright-designed Guggenheim Museum opens in New York.  Frank Sinatra’s Only the Lonely manifests a kind of self-revelation in popular culture.  John Birch Society founded.  Seagram Building, designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, opens in New York.  Fifth and final volume of William Carlos Williams’s Paterson published.
1959:  Fidel Castro’s Rebel Army enters Havana, overthrowing the US-backed Battista regime. Eleanor Flexner publishes first major history of the women’s suffrage movement, Century of Struggle.  A movie version of The Diary of a Young Girl popularizes the story of Dutch Jewish Anne Frank and builds attention to the Nazi destruction of European Jewry.  Joseph Campbell’s The Masks of God begins a multivolume survey of world mythology.  National Defense Education Act (NDEA) passed, increasing federal funding for university training in foreign languages and area studies.  Hazel Barnes’s Literature of Possibility: A Study in Humanistic Existentialism gives scholarly imprimatur to contemporary continental European philosophy.  Robert Frank’s photographic tour of the United States, The Americans, published.   Allan Kaprow stages his first major work, 18 Happenings in Six Parts, at New York’s Reuben Gallery.  The Living Theatre production of The Connection bracingly depicts heroin use  The U.S. Information Agency’s American National Exhibition in Moscow, designed by Jack Massey, Buckminster Fuller, Peter Blake and others, provides the site for the “kitchen debate” between Richard Nixon and Nikita Khrushchev.
1960:  Lunch counter sit-ins begin, Greensboro, North Carolina, February; SCLC executive secretary Ella Baker facilitates the organization of Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), at Shaw University, Raleigh, N.C., May.  Daniel Bell publishes The End of Ideology.  Walt W. Rostow’s The Stages of Economic Growth appears as both a theory of modernization and an ideological précis of John Kennedy’s foreign policy.  Dissenting jazz musicians, led by Kenny Dorham, Charles Mingus, Ornette Coleman, and Max Roach, organize a “counterfestival” to the Newport Jazz Festival, June 30.  Paul Goodman’s Growing Up Absurd diagnoses the “problems of [male] youth in the organized society.”  Donald Allen’s edition, The New American Poetry, 1945-1960, records the rise of a new modernism in American literature.  Peter Lynch’s The Image of the City examines the mental maps city dwellers create of their environment.The conservative Young Americans for Freedom (YAF)  is founded at William Buckley’s Sharon, Connecticut, estate; Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) emerges as the new incarnation of the left-wing Student League for Industrial Democracy.  Edward R. Murrow’s documentary on migrant farmworkers, Harvest of Shame, shows on CBS television.
1961:  Patrice Lumumba, prime minister of the Democratic Republic of Congo, assassinated with the connivance of U.S. intelligence agencies, January 17.  Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba defeated, April.  Representatives of 90 tribes issue Declaration of Indian Purpose; in Gallup, Texas, younger activists led by Clyde Warrior and Mel Thom found the National Indian Youth Council.  Berlin Wall constructed.  W. E. B. Du Bois leaves the United States, October (takes Ghanaian citizenship 1963). Herman Kahn’s On Nuclear War manifests the work of the new strategic-policy intellectuals. Fifty thousand join Women Strike for Peace, calling for a nuclear test ban.  Robert Dahl’s Who Governs? contends power resides in competing interest groups rather than a single ruling class, contrary to C. Wright Mills’s elite theory.  The culminating work of Lewis Mumford’s career in urbanism, The City in History, wins the National Book Award; Jane Jacobs’s The Death and Life of Great American Cities challenges mid-century urban planning.  Judy Garland’s “comeback” concert at Carnegie Hall is a coming-out party for her gay fans.  Art and Culture collects Clement Greenberg’s key essays on American modernist painting.  Louis Chu’s novel, Eat a Bowl of Tea, breaks with white stereotypes of life in New York’s Chinatown.
1962:  Milton Friedman publishes his free-market manifesto, Capitalism and Freedom, bringing ideas germinated in the “neoliberal” Mont Pèlerin Society during the late 1940s to popular attention.  Michael Harrington’s expose of poverty, The Other America, appears.  Herbert Gans’s Urban Villagers shows a Italian-American working-class neighborhood in Boston resisting “urban renewal.”  Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring on the ecological dangers of pesticide DDT bridges the concerns about nuclear fall-out with a new environmentalism published. Thomas Kuhn invigorates debate about scientific progress in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. SDS drafts its political declaration of “participatory democracy,” the Port Huron Statement.  The Cuban Missile Crisis at its height, October.  Bob Dylan records “A Hard Rain’s a-Gonna Fall,” denying later that he intended it to refer to nuclear war or radioactive fall-out.  Yvonne Rainer, Steve Paxton, Robert Dunn and others launch the Judson Dance Theater in New York.  “The New Realists” exhibition in New York showcases the work of Andy Warhol and other Pop artists.
1963:  Hannah Arendt’s Eichmann in Jerusalem appears in the New Yorker. Betty Friedan publishes The Feminine Mystique. The Bell Jar published under a pseudonym in Britain, a month before author Sylvia Plath commits suicide.  SCLC mounts Birmingham, Alabama, campaign for city-wide desegregation; Martin Luther King Jr. writes “Letter from a Birmingham Jail.”  Saigon self-immolation of Buddhist monk Thich Quang Duc.  Civil rights leader Medgar Evers assassinated in Jackson, Mississippi, by Klansman Byron De La Beckwith.  Limited nuclear test ban treaty signed.  March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, August 28.  Four young African American girls killed by a racist bombing of Birmingham church, September 15.  Yale psychologist Stanley Milgram publishes the first report of his alarming experiments regarding “obedience to authority.”  Ngo Dinh Diem assassinated in South Vietnam coup, November 1. John F. Kennedy assassinated in Dallas, November 22.  LeRoi Jones’s Blues People marks a new interpretation of Black music in the United States.  James Baldwin appears on the cover of Time magazine after publication of The Fire Next Time. Ethnographer and dancer Katherine Dunham choreographs the Metropolitan Opera’s production of Aida.
