
**The Young and the Restless**


Few discussions of the Fifties fail to mention the species known as the American teenager, identifiable by its common experience of high school and its own particular culture and behavioral repertoire. As Joseph Kett has demonstrated, before the twentieth century Americans were unaccustomed to thinking of the teen years as a distinct period devoted to experimentation and preparation for adulthood, or to assume that puberty was accompanied by emotional turbulence. The first full articulation of youth as a transitional state suspended between childhood and adulthood was the psychologist G. Stanley Hall’s *Adolescence* (1904). Hall saw the condition as one of storm and stress, marked by conflict with parents, mood swings and risky behavior. “Youth,” he wrote, “awakes to a new world and understands neither it nor himself.”[^48]

[^48]: Joseph F. Kett, *Rites of Passage: Adolescence in America, 1790 to the Present* (New York: Basic Books, 1977); Hall, quoted in Thomas Hine, *The Rise and Fall of the American Teenager* (New York, N.Y.: Bard, 1999), 160.

Hall’s concept was the province of experts rather until the term “teenager” came into general use at midcentury. It arose primarily to demarcate a group that had enough disposable income to constitute a market segment that marketeers could exploit. In very short order, it came to signify not only Hall's storm and stress but also insecurities among peers and career uncertainties. Adults recognized American adolescents as a distinctive breed. According to a famous post-Sputnik *Life* magazine story, they were the reverse of their Soviet counterparts. Where Soviet teenagers were dedicated to their studies and committed to the success of their nation, Americans obsessed over dating, sports, and possession of the latest consumer goods. The characterization of American teenagers as consumed by the pursuit of fun, fun, fun was clearly a limited one. Not only did it obscure the threat of nuclear annihilation that haunted the future, it also defined fun in ways more typical of white, middle-class teenagers. The amusements and practices of racial minorities and working-class teenagers were often linked with juvenile delinquency.[^49]

[^49]: “School boys point up a US weakness,” *Life Magazine* (March 24, 1958), 26-35. On juvenile delinquency, see James Burkhart. Gilbert, *A Cycle of Outrage: America’s Reaction to the Juvenile Delinquent in the 1950s* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986).

Adult puzzlement about teenagers stimulated numerous reports from the field in order to understand the condition. As is often the case for voyages to unknown lands, the accounts were diametrically opposed to one another. The classic conception of the teenage state was psychoanalyst Erik Erikson’s _Childhood and Society_ (1951). Best known for its psychological elaboration of the concept of identity, the book melded the biological and social struggles on the road to adulthood in a way that drew upon Erikson’s training and inclinations. Born in 1902 in Frankfort, uncertain who was his father (which, biographers have speculated, accounts for his interest in identity), he migrated in 1927 to Vienna to teach at a school designed for children whose parents were in treatment with Anna Freud. At her urging, he enrolled at the Vienna Psychoanalytic Institute, where he received his diploma in 1933. Harassed by the Nazis, he and his wife Joan set sail for the United States that same year. Using his contacts in the culture and personality school of anthropologists--- Edward Sapir, Margaret Mead, Alfred Kroeber, and Ruth Benedict ---Erikson spent time observing the Sioux and the Yoruk before taking a position at the University of California. Those observations bore fruit in _Childhood and Society_’s emphasis on the culture-bound nature of personality development. Critical of efforts to enforce conformity by edict, he left the Berkeley campus in the early 1950s in protest of the requirement that faculty sign loyalty oaths.

*Childhood and Society* laid out eight stages of life, each of which linked biological development to what Erikson termed a psychosocial crisis. As individuals attempt to master the bodily functions and the corresponding life task, they encounter a set of conflicts that raise existential questions. So the initial stage of life in which the infant struggles with oral mastery and negotiates between inside and outside is rooted in the relationship with the mother and raises the question of trust. Subsequent stages involve bowel control and muscle control, which have as their life tasks negotiating the conflict between autonomy and shame and doubt and initiative and guilt respectively. Erikson’s sequence is cumulative: successful negotiation of the crisis of each stage yields rewards or “virtues.” A child who negotiates the trust - mistrust psychosocial challenge will emerge with hope. Passing through the second stage with a sense of autonomy rather than shame or doubt, for instance, bestows the virtue of will. Although Erikson posed one pole of the challenge as the optimal or desirable force, he was well aware that both were needed for healthy living. Some mistrust of others is surely warranted, as is retaining some reserves of shame and doubt. Those who could not balance psychosocial forces or interact with the outside in productive ways could, Erikson maintained, pass on to the next stage, but the residue of the unsuccessful challenge would reassert itself in problems in later life.[^50]

[^50]:	Erik H. Erikson, *Childhood and Society* (New York: Norton, 1950), 219-35.

The contrast with Freudian orthodoxy was marked. Rather than emphasize the conflicts between nature and social demands in the early years of life that endowed individuals with a characteristic stock of psychic responses, Erikson treated each stage as important in its own right. Working from the position that the ego had its own claims and was not necessarily at the mercy of the more powerful id and superego, Erikson contended that adolescence was not simply a consequence of Oedipal struggles but an important component of an ongoing process.

Given Erikson’s insistence that identity was necessary to the feeling of being alive, one might conclude that the four prior stages led up to the crucial work of adolescence and the three subsequent ones expressed and expanded the identity that developed in adolescence. In Erikson's scheme, the years between puberty and nineteen were a time of struggle between identity (a continuous and stable sense of one’s character, qualities, and goals) and role confusion (the inability to settle upon appropriate ways of being and achieve detente between self and society). Successful resolution of the psychosocial crisis entailed integrating memories of what one had been in the past with anticipations of what one hoped to be in the future. Easier said than done because adolescents were still uncertain of their physical and mental powers and intensely sensitive to how they appeared to others. If the task of identity is frustrated, much anti-social destructive behavior followed. As complicated as the stage could be, most adolescents do find an identity. Crucial to success was parental allowance for experimentation. Those who do open up space for a “moratorium,” Erikson advised, will generally find that their children have developed a full-blown identity in which they have reestablished boundaries and learned to negotiate a sometimes hostile world.

Although adolescence took place during a specific point in the life cycle and entailed finding identity, Erikson insisted that the content of adolescence varied from culture to culture, a point he developed further in his studies of Luther and Gandhi.[^52] Nature alone did not dictate how adolescence would be experienced or how the psychosocial conflict would be resolved. Drawing on his anthropological work, Erikson concluded that adolescence was best understood as an experiment in constituting and reconstituting fragmentary selves. Because the purpose of identity was to help individuals adapt to historical change, there was never just one successful resolution of the identity crisis but a number of reasonable ones.

The process would always be more or less tumultuous, but, the European Erikson maintained, it need not be as as severe and disorienting as it was in the United States. American adolescents were ill-equipped because the culture favored constant reinvention in the quest of singularity and American institutions were far to impermanent to guide transitions. Worried about the effects of mass society , Erikson bemoaned the ways incessant preparation for success resulted in a population of "overadjusted" teenagers who were prematurely pushed to a premature resolution of the psychosocial crisis. The prime purveyors of what he called the "social jungle of human existence was “Mom” (punctuation in the original), a composite, stereotypical entity who managed her children’s lives. The over-controlling, castrating mother, made famous by Phillip Wylie's *Generation of Vipers* (1942), received much criticism for building weak children during midcentury. In Erikson's version, she insisted on rigid moral behavior to help her children become independent but the actual effect was a feeling of abandonment in her children at one level and of guilt from abandoning her at another.[@wylie1942. On changes in motherhood, see @plant2010]


[^52]:	Erik H. Erikson, *Gandhi’s Truth: On the Origins of Militant Nonviolence* (New York: Norton, 1969); Erik H. Erikson, *Young Man Luther: A Study in Psychoanalysis and History.* (New York: Norton, 1958).


Erikson endorsed Freud’s formula that a healthy self was capable of work and love but concentrated more on the former than the latter. Marynia Farnham and James Coleman, on the other hand, regarded adolescents as far too obsessed with love. Or at least sex. Both issued the now familiar charge that parents’ supervision was far too lax. Farnham’s *The Adolescent* (1951) recognized that teenagers were caught between physical maturity and social prohibitions on their sexuality but instead of different mores or adolescent independence, she espoused stricter supervision. Iterating the position she took in her anti-feminist tract, *Modern Woman* (1947), she excoriated women who “deserted the home for the supposedly more rewarding and exiting life of rivalry with men” and criticized parents who failed to enforce guidelines, believing that “youngsters can make all decisions for themselves and that uncurbed freedom is their right from birth on.”[^44] Whether increased parental supervision would resolve the conflict between physical development and social custom or clarify role confusion remained open questions.

Coleman’s *Adolescent Society* (1961), which was based on his observation of ten Chicago-area high schools, concentrated on what he called the countercultural nature of adolescents. Walled off from the rest of society, teenagers so resembled one other that being a teenager outweighed differences in race, income, or geography. The culture that teenagers built was, Coleman insisted, revolved around trivial concerns and driven by peer pressure and minute attention to the judgment of others. These other-directed personalities in training were consumers par excellence, interested only in making the proper impression at sporting events and dances. Much to Coleman’s dismay, they cared little for academic success and relegated scholars to social marginality. Teen culture, Coleman concluded, even when not openly delinquent, was incompatible with preparation for adulthood or contribution to the community.[^45]
Coleman’s evidence suggested other interpretations, however. As sociologist Bennett Berger noted in an incisive 1963 review, Coleman missed much of the similarities between adolescents and their parents and misunderstood the goals that many adults had set for high school. Berger rightly noted that teenagers’ interest in cars, clothes, the opposite sex, and sports followed adults’ interest in those very same things. Football, he pointed out, had a better chance of creating community solidarity than academic achievements, which were too individualized and specialized to serve that purpose. Coleman missed plenty of evidence that the kids were not always countercultural. A majority of his respondents indicated that they preferred the parent-approved Pat Boone over Elvis Presley by a wide margin and claimed that they would rather risk breaking with a friend than earning their parents’ disapproval.[^46]

If Farnham and Coleman looked rather unsympathetically at teenagers’ efforts to find themselves, a trio of cultural critics did not. Best known to later generations was the anarchist critic and Gestalt therapist Paul Goodman. In *Growing Up Absurd* (1960), Goodman argued, contra Coleman, that adults had too much control over adolescence. Rather than chaos, Goodman discerned conformity and training for regimented work, which he dismissed as “the organized system.” Schools, he charged, were factories of impulse suppression and sexual prudery. Given his Gestalt commitments, Goodman was especially opposed to selves divided from society. Youth institutions enforced boundaries, denying the young the chance to mold the world to their liking. Under such circumstances, Goodman argued, adulthood was mere adjustment and perpetual living with a perpetually constrained ego. Simply rejecting the American way of growing up was insufficient, Goodman maintained. The Beats earned his disapproval for their resignation and, while understanding of delinquents’ response, he nonetheless found them too fatalistic for his liking. Growing up with meaning, Goodman concluded, required reworking the world of love and work to encourage honesty, independence, and caring.

Edgar Z. Friedenberg, on the other hand, worried that American adolescence was not the moratorium that it was intended to be. His _Vanishing Adolescent_ (1959) lamented that rather than an Eriksonian time of experimentation and counterculture, the teenage years were contaminated by adult insistence that activities have socially acceptable ends. Unlike simple societies and lower-class subcultures, Friendenberg argued, intricate social organizations require an extended testing process so people can master roles. Individuals developed stable ego identities by setting themselves against the social order and becoming aware of “the complex, subtle, and precious difference between himself and his environment.”[^47] The *sturm und drang* of adolescence might last yet lead teenagers to achieve a profound sense of self, Friedenberg asserted in one of the book’s more controversial passages, if they were free to acted as if they were aristocrats. He had in mind not so much imperiousness as self-assuredness. Adults were unlikely to allow such behavior but there was a model for safe aristocratic demeanor in British boarding schools, which gave “adolescents something to be adolescent about” in a relatively protected environment. American children, on the other hand, were provided experiences with the appearance of adulthood but none of the difficulties or unpleasantness. Rather than allowing disagreements to unfold properly, adult anxieties actively suppressed clashes. By treating all disagreement as unproductive, American society insured that growing up would result in few authentic individuals capable of deeply felt relationships with others.

Goodman and Friedenberg shared a dislike of other-directedness and consumerism for preventing independence and authenticity. Although praised for their emphasis on teenage initiative, both attracted criticism their partial portraits of the teenage condition. Critics charged they did far too little empirical observation, dwelt far too much on the pathologies of adolescence and all too often attributed them solely to adult actions. Then, as now, they were also criticized for making the male teenager the norm, a choice possibly a consequence of their own homosexuality. Women, Goodman insisted in the introduction, did not grow up absurd since they “will have children which is absolutely self-justifying, like any other natural or creative act.” Further, he went on in the introduction, the problems of teenage boys were “intensely interesting to women, for if the boys do not grow up to be men, where shall the women find men?”[^48]

Anthropologist Jules Henry, on the other hand, took girls’ problems seriously and provided a more detailed description of the problems of finding one’s self. The adolescence sections of his _Culture Against Man_ (1963), based on observations of St. Louis-area high schools, revealed how the essence of the teen years was insecurity. More than any other analyst, Henry captured the silent terror and constant confusion of adolescence. Writing with a socially aware Freudianism, Henry was sympathetic to the costs of the demands of the id, which were exaggerated by the constant mobility of American life. Because families moved so frequently, friendships, which would have enabled sublimation, were often unstable. Such instability resulted in an inadequacy felt on the prom dance floor and automobile backseats. Parental shortcomings lay less in the absence of discipline than in failure to establish and live out meaningful lives. This inability of adults to provide ego ideals, Henry argued, created a void that peers filled. Girls were especially affected in adolescence. The difficulty lay not so much in limited goals, since beauty, fashion and popularity struck him as legitimate and meaningful pursuits, as parental goading of girls into sexual competition to snare the right husband and condemnation of those who refused to compete.[^49]

Henry located another consequence of the lack of ego ideals in the aversion of teenagers to work. The example of “hard-working daddies” who are “little at home and burdened with the irritations, coronaries, and ulcers of their work” only underwrote pleasure-seeking behavior. Schools, too, were inadequate in setting meaningful ideals. In contrast to Coleman, Henry regarded school work as unchallenging and meaningless. Studying, especially when nagged to do so by parents, made Henry’s informants feel at the will of others. Promise of vague future benefits from school work only compounded the feeling. Yet because adolescents neither developed their own standards of success nor were involved in institutions in which the standards were meaningful to their talents or aspirations, grades loomed large in their education and work life. Grading met no needs, Henry claimed, but it did accustom students to accept impersonal, standardized norms as the best metric of self-worth. For the majority, this too was a recipe for feelings of inadequacy. Turning to pleasure seeking in response yielded little long-term gain and augured poorly for leaving adolescence with an Eriksonian “reward.”

The treatment of the adolescent search for self in expressive culture, while often sympathetic to the trials and tribulations of the young, was less Friedenberg than Farnham, less stories of change than fantasies of separatism. Although postwar art and fiction shared with earlier coming-of-age stories the conventions of a confused and unsettled protagonist and a distant and seemingly implacable social order, the novels and films of the mid-twentieth century departed from the models of the classic _bildungsroman_ and _kunstlerroman_. Those were novels of formation and growth of self. Narrated in the third person, connoting the objective truth of the situation, classic youth novels ended with the protagonists wiser and more understanding than when they began, their skills in negotiating the variability of life enhanced. Beginning their journey set against a society that seemingly had no place for them, they usually ended with a better sense of where they fit in and who they were. Their hard-won maturity enabled them to avoid repeating the mistakes of youth. Of the portrayal of adolescent crisis that were popular among subsequent generations (or at least teachers of subsequent generations), perhaps only John Knowles’s *Separate Peace* (1959) harkened back to nineteenth-century traditions of character formation.
Much postwar depictions of adolescents, on the other hand, resisted conjuring up a viable or attractive version of maturity. Written in the first person or shot with a subjective camera, midcentury novels and films were statements of feeling, perceptions, and partial understandings of the narrator. Those viewpoints were partial and rarely broaden out to larger views. As titles such as _On the Road_ and _Rabbit Run_ indicate, postwar novels and films emphasized movement, not arrival. Their protagonists lack meaningful models and meaningful goals. The classic youth movies and novels often point to the romance of permanent adolescence. In highlighting their rejection of adult corruption and their own suffering, the teenagers of the classic postwar adolescent work of art treat their status as unique regardless of whether their acts truly warrant that designation. Even those characters whose lives are not particularly angst-ridden, like the protagonist of Saul Bellow’s picaresque novel, _The Adventures of Augie March_ (1953), lack a sense of purpose and commitment. March’s tale takes him from one thing to another, from Chicago poolrooms and Mexican deserts to service in the Merchant Marine and a sketchy postwar European business career. March is optimistic rather than morose. He imagines himself a “sort of Columbus” having before him an “immediate terra incognita that spreads out in every gaze.” Yet he shares with other adolescent protagonists a lack of overarching goals, deep held commitments, or truly stable or affectionate relationships with others.
Despite its reputation, Nicholas Ray’s _Rebel Without a Cause_ (1955), a film depicting twenty-four hours in the life of troubled teenager Jim Stark, was less rebellious than conservative. Known for James Dean’s star turn in which he combined daring, anger, pain, and an expressive adolescent inarticulateness, the movie often seemed like Farnham in Technicolor. Jim’s parents never make him face the consequences of his behavior, moving to a new school every time he has a brush with the law or fails to make friend. When he tries to take responsibility for the death of a rival during a “chickie run,” a race in two stolen cars towards a cliff that is won by being the last to jump out, his parents attempt to dissuade him, much to his disgust. At the heart of Jim’s teen angst is the gender trouble all around him. His cold and demanding mother clearly dominates his father, who backs down in nearly every argument rather than live with unpleasantness. His father (Jim Backus) so obviously lacks the proper masculinity that he wears an apron over his suit while doing household chores (a particular warning sign in a period committed to a clear and obvious sexual division of roles, which Ray emphasized by making it a particularly frilly full-length one). He does not, and apparently cannot, answer Jim’s constant question about what one has to do to be a man. The lack of guidance drives Jim to complain that his father just wants to be his pal. He goes so far as to hope his dad would haul off and hit his mother just once and set things straight. No one, he concludes, could grow up in a circus like that. His parents’ mixed messages, he howls after being brought to jail for public drunkenness, are tearing him apart. He is not the only teen who has parents who fail to fulfill their proper gender roles. Judy (Natalie Wood), whose efforts to kiss her father are greeted with pushes and slaps, and Plato (Sal Mineo), a boy coded as gay whose father fled his family, end up in an abandoned mansion where they play fantasy family with quite traditional roles. A showdown leads to Plato’s death and Jim’s parents mistakenly believe the dead boy was their son. Learning otherwise, Jim’s dad vows to be a better father, restoring the family to its proper patriarchal form. That, in turn, allows Jim a proper relationship with Judy.

The allure of permanent adolescence was part of the long-standing appeal of J. D. Salinger’s novel _Catcher in the Rye_ (1951). In his moral insistence and emotional vulnerability, Holden Caulfield exemplifies the traits that made teenagers both fascinating and exasperating. Holden is prone to maudlin displays of concern and tremendous remorse (apparent in his trek through Central Park to find where the ducks go in winter and his subsequent breaking the record bought for his sister Phoebe), indifferent to school and achievement, and drawn to such unrealistic plans as living in the wilderness. Although superficially aware of adult practices (drinking in night clubs, going to Broadway plays, staying alone in a hotel), Holden is nonetheless uncomfortable with adult status. He fails to lose his virginity despite his efforts in part because he is deeply ambivalent about sexuality, often treating any trace as an unwarranted aggression on the innocence and generosity of children. He recoils at obscene graffiti on the merry - go- round and imagines himself as the protector of the purity of children, the person who catches children playing an unspecified game in a rye field on the edge of a cliff. Rejecting the advice of a former teacher that an immature man wishes to die of a noble cause while a mature one hopes to live humbly for one, Holden envies the stasis of the Eskimos in the diorama at the Natural History museum, wishing that he too could stay the same forever.
Holden’s indictment of adulthood is among the best-known parts of the book. Almost everyone who has read it --- whether he or she admires him for his truth telling or recoils from his whininess --- remembers his tendency to label others (and at times himself) as “phony.” The phrase became part of the lexicon of midcentury because it pithily encapsulated the postwar concern with authenticity and the representative role of adolescents in feeling their way toward it. Phonies cheat at the Eriksonian task of balancing self-expression with social involvement. They adopt socially acceptable behavior not from commitment but for material and personal gain. Their concern for others derives from their sense that such gestures are social expected. Holden applies the word to such disparate examples of metropolitan life as his roommate Stradlater who exploits his dates, the headmaster who insincerely greets odd-looking parents, and patrons who cheer wildly for the Rockettes’ precision dancing, Lunt-Fontaine performances, and the nightclub pianist Ernie’s predictable flourishes. Adults might well judge the insincerity in dealing with others a more serious (if sometimes necessary) offense than the exercise of bad taste. In Holden’s world, however, both insincerity and lack of aesthetic discrimination are equally products of a social world of artifice and manipulation in which spontaneity, joy, kindness, and wholeness are absent. Holden, in contrast, champions an authentic world in which people act as they really are.
As committed as he is to authenticity, Holden is still very much a vulnerable adolescent. Protecting his faint sense of who he really is often leads him into actions that are themselves phony. As he himself admits, he is “the most terrific liar you ever saw.” Indeed, he dissembles constantly. Some lies are designed to conform to social norms as when he tells the mother of the “biggest bastard that ever went to Pency” that her son is both popular and modest because he thinks she is nice and does not want to puncture her illusions. Other lies are cruel, as when he punishes the shallow women from Seattle by telling them they just missed seeing the actor Gary Cooper. Still other falsehoods deflect attention away from Holden’s actual situation. Personal communication is fraught for Holden because it risks bringing up painful memories of his brother Allie’s death and exacerbating his uneasiness with himself. It is also fraught because Holden possesses enough self-awareness to realize his own propensity for phoniness. Locked in the dilemma, all he can imagine is going West and living as a deaf mute. Alienation, normally an obstacle to coming to terms with oneself and one’s feelings, is here the guarantor of authenticity and the protector of identity against change and social expectations. The enduring popularity of the novel among adults suggests, perhaps, a desire to jettison adulthood from the liminal state of adolescence. The depth of the identification with the novel had led some to talk of adolescence as a kind of ethnicity.
Critics have touted Sylvia Plath’s novel _The_ _Bell Jar_ (1963) as the female version of _Catcher_, and the similarities are clear. Plath’s protagonist, Esther Greenwood, shares with Holden Caulfield a profound alienation from the adult world and from herself. Like him, she judges others as inauthentic and has no sense of what she wants to be. The publication history of the books paralleled each other. Both were turned down by the publishers that originally commissioned their work, with Salinger’s editor telling him that he could not tell if Holden was supposed to be crazy or not and Plath’s labeling hers “disappointing, juvenile, and overwrought.” Both authors were thought to identify with their lead characters. Although famously a recluse, Salinger did try to peddle a stage version with the provision that he play Holden. Plath drew many of the details from her own life and committed suicide shortly after the British publication.

Yet the social world that Esther finds so oppressive is only partially the one that Holden believes is filled with phonies. The inauthenticity that Plath details takes on a special complexion because it is women’s roles that Esther finds so oppressive. Winner of a prestigious summer internship at a New York woman’s magazine, _Ladies Day_, Esther is unmoved by what other girls would have regarded as a dream chance, feeling only “still and empty”(2). Unlike her fellow interns, she rejects traditional goals. When asked what she wants to be, she can only manage that she doesn’t know. Female identity as conventionally advanced repels her. She compares marriage and children rearing to being “brainwashed”: “you went about numb as a slave in some private totalitarian state” (81). Childbirth is akin to being trapped in a “long, blind, doorless and windowless corridor of pain” (p. 62). The double standard infuriates her. She labels her boyfriend Buddy a “hypocrite” when he admits he is not a virgin and breaks off their engagement. Losing her virginity to a tall but not very good-looking mathematician in Cambridge leads to hemorrhaging and a trip to the hospital. In short, she regards the female existence as being under a bell jar --- an image she uses to describe her own empty, airless, suspended experience but applies later to the college girls who play bridge, gossip and study. Her ability to see the bell jar that others do not establishes her distinctive perception while pointing to a common condition for women.
Esther’s lack of traditional feminine desires prompts her to undertake an unsuccessful search for meaning. Her quest to be a writer comes to naught when she is rejected for a summer class at Harvard taught by a famous writer. Finding nothing satisfying, she veers toward a madness that liberates her from the social imperatives imposed upon middle-class women, but which also risks obliterating the internal self altogether. Where Holden aspires to be isolated or in a perpetual adolescent state, Esther struggles simply to be able to say “I am.” At times she feels a zombie inside her, preventing her from speaking or writing, convinced that her deteriorating penmanship is the sign of insanity she needs to hide from her doctor. Her suicide attempts fail because she is convinced that her body will not obey her mind. Where traditionally the mind (or head) has been regarded as the scene of the self, Esther experiences what Abigail Cheever has called “a profound disintegration” in which her body and her mind are not working in tandem; her rationality gone, her existence is affirmed by the acts of her body. Contending that it has “little tricks,” she sets as her goal escaping being “trapped in its stupid cage for fifty years” left “without any sense at all” (153).
As her disintegration worsens, Esther enters treatment with an arrogant, self-absorbed and unfeeling male psychiatrist who subjects her to electroshock therapy. Walking out, rather than endure more hellish torture, she continues her efforts at suicide. Eventually she comes close enough to succeeding by taking fifty sleeping pills at once and hiding in her cellar, which results in her confinement in a private hospital. There, after a successful electroshock treatment and an empathetic therapy with a female doctor, she finally comes to a tenuous and fragile grip on normality, being able to say at a funeral of a friend who successfully committed suicide, “I am, I am, I am,” which she ascribes to “the old brag of my heart.” Where her mother insists she treat her illness as if it were a bad dream, she counters to herself that she cannot since it was part of her. By retaining a sense of her madness, Esther emphasizes her distance from social roles, even as she prepares to be released into the social world and lead what others might term a normal existence. Yet the content of her character remains sketchy at best. Nor is it certain that she will not try suicide again. As such, Esther Greenwood serves as a stark example of how fragile the success of finding oneself had become.

Notes





[^52]:	Erik H. Erikson, *Gandhi’s Truth: On the Origins of Militant Nonviolence* (New York: Norton, 1969); Erik H. Erikson, *Young Man Luther: A Study in Psychoanalysis and History.* (New York: Norton, 1958).

[^52]:	Erikson’s discussion draws on Phillip Wylie’s more virulent *Generation of Vipers* (1943) which coined the derogatory “Momism.” For an insightful discussion of the book and the intellectual climate, see Rebecca Jo Plant, *Mom: The Transformation of Motherhood in Modern America* (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2010).

[^53]:	Marynia F. Farnham, *The Adolescent* (New York: Harper, 1951), 211, 221.

[^54]:	James S. Coleman, *The Adolescent Society: The Social Life of the Teenager and Its Impact on Education* (New York: Free Press of Glencoe, 1961).

[^55]:	Bennett M. Berger, “Adolescence and Beyond: An Essay Review of Three Books on the Problems of Growing Up: *The Adolescent Society* by James Coleman; *Growing Up Absurd* by Paul Goodman; *The Vanishing Adolescent* by Edgar Z. Friedenberg,” *Social Problems* 10, 4 (Spring): 394-408.

[^56]:	Edgar Z. Friedenberg, *The Vanishing Adolescent.* (Boston: Beacon Press, 1959), 13.

[^57]:	Paul Goodman, *Growing Up Absurd: Problems of Youth in the Organized Society* (New York: NYRB Classics, 1960), 21-22.

[^58]:	Jules Henry, *Culture Against Man* (New York: Random House, 147-282, especially 170-180.
