Briggs especially devoted to Jungian dream interpretation - assumes the Personality structure as the expression, even to the point of claiming ostensible sexual elements were not [@emre2018, p. 72-3]

Katherine actually had a dream study club outside Washington D. C.[@emre2018, p. 78]

at 1936 300th anniversary of Harvard, Jung delivered address on dreams [@emre2018, p.89] noted fearful scenarios visiting at night "The great psychotherapeutic systems of the past were religions, Jung claimed, which had little patience for the individual psyche. Religions healed people through the depersonalization of suffering. Enduring great sorrow was as important for heavenly redemption as performing good deeds or attending Sunday services. By contrast analytic psychology cared about the individual's feelings and experiences with an intensity that was unprecedented in American society--a philosophy of emotional attentiveness that was especially pertinent to the nation's female minds. 'You can't think women away or think through them,' he concluded, 'Feeling is the only thing applicable.'"

Briggs-Murray-Jung nexus. Key book is *Psychological Types* (1923)[@emre2018, p. 93-96] interesting that Jung thought introverted, intuitive, and thinking types had to learn to disregard bourgeois ideas of right and wrong. types and specialization for CJ, even with women -- mothers took care of children, concubines libido, inspiring new passions. [@emre2018, p.95]

Murray's personology -- accounted for everything in the objective and subjective realms--observable tics, habits, routines, unconscious sexual urges, etc. -- attempt to "narrate the complicated business of existence without reducing it to anything as crude as Watson's philosophy of learned behavior or Freud's theories of sexual repression." [@emre2018, p.96]

introvert-Extrovert Club in New York for Jung's students. took over from Morton Prince at Harvard, Prince was the founder of the American school of psychotherapy and the first psychologist to identify a case of multiple personality disorder in 1906 book *The Dissociation of a Personality*. Worked with Allport, stress on internal life.

Cecilia Roberts suggested rather than having patient generate images to analyze, psychiatrist show images and hear a story. Assumption -- main character represented the test subject. plot revealed actual or fantasied events. [@emre2018, p.99]

On Hitler -- how did a rather unimpressive physical (Murray) and psychological specimen become a near demigod and a psychic and political force.[@emre2018, p. 106] approached by the OSS, Hitler seemed to have sexual perversions.

"For both Katharine and Murray, then, the personality of Adolf Hitler had come to stand in for more properly political concerns about fascism: the centralization of authority, the rising tides of nationalism and ethnocentrism, the programs of mass deportation and genocide. In the cold light of historical retrospect, the easy slippage from the personal to the political might seem surprising. Or it might not. For even today, politics remains chained to discourses of personality in ways that are as crude as, if not cruder than, Murray's assessment of Hitler. Most people want to like their democratically elected leaders or want them to be likable or, at the very least, presentable and polite--the kind of man you could invite over for a beer, the kind of woman who might read sweet stories to your children. Sometimes it seems that we are more shocked by violations of common courtesy than we are by unfair or oppressive policies.

The politicization of personality is not wrong in any moral sense. It is simply the inevitable result of a modern democratic process that invites the people to imagine their elected officials as extensions of themselves -- their representatives in a very literal sense. The body that Germans saw on display at dozens of rallies and speeches--the flabby muscles, the hollow chest, the ladylike walk--stood in to only for the nation's public preferences but for its people's private lives: their feelings of impotence, their discriminatory states of mind, the stories they had invented to explain the injustice of their place in the world."[@emre2018, p. 110-1]

Inadequacies of personology -- no reliable way to map Hitler's past or present attributes onto the projected behaviors of his future self. [@emre2018, p. 112-3]

In Jung’s view feeling is a rational function, like thinking, in that it is decisively influenced not by perception (as are the functions of sensation and intuition) but by reflection.

Intuition. The psychic function that perceives possibilities inherent in the present. . . . n Jung’s model of typology, intuition, like sensation, is an irrational function because its apprehension of the world is based on the perception of given facts. Unlike sensation, however, it perceives via the unconscious and is not dependent on concrete reality. . . . . Intuition may receive information from within (for instance, as a flash of insight of unknown origin), or be stimulated by what is going on in someone else.

feelers made decisions based on what was important to them; thinkers by what was logical. judgment (conclusion) perception (awareness) is order or flexibility. If a P, proffered to take in information and dominant function was whichever of the two perceptive functions preferred, sensing or intuition. Judging made decision, and dominant function either thinking or feeling.

Interesting that introverted and intuitive in different situations acted otherwise. could assert unchecked power as authority figures. "the line between self-discovery and self-creation began to blur" [@emre2018, p. 154]

On Adorno -- not enough to expose one fascist leader but for Adorno, an extension of industrial modernity. "The hierarchical division of society into classes meant that the marks of social repression were impressed onto the soul long before a demagogic leader ever opened his mouth to speak."

F scale -- find latent desires, fascists preyed on those who lacked critical acuity, who were conventional and obsequious

Clearly Meyers was less democratic in her visions for the test. Wasn't worth testing or informing workers. Type differences show in developed half of the population. [@emre2018, p. 167]

No validation -- not always produce the same results or that types actually required for particular occupations. Qualitative explanations for transformations or inversions tended to be circular and self confirming. Claimed act of 'crossing over' meant that the indicator did more than passively reflect the true self; it provoked the emergence of a better self from within the mind's cocoon of uncertainty and self-hatred, preserving modes of perception (like sensing) and judgment (like feeling) that society had debased as inefficient, weak, or feminine. so that discovery of value in the undervalued. [@emre2018, p. 168-170]

Whyte's critique -- test that claims to be for the individual masks "the total integration" into the social ethos. Not so much overthrow the ethos but mask oneself (which is, of course, a way to end up within the society, all the while nursing fantasies of difference, separation, and distinctiveness)

Worries that personality had congealed and hardened into commodity -- job, salary, promotion, associates, life chances. Personality marketplace, Fromm called it. Emre calls this endeavor the resurrection of the true self. And this might be noteworthy, underwritten by foundations and Universities. [@emre2018, p. 179-80]

Constant regime of testing. Emre sees Sputnik as a cultural shift away from fitting in and normal bourgeois order toward creative uiqueness. ETS persuades Meyers to switch the name to Myers -Briggs so as to avoid BM Type Indicator jokes.liked because  allegedly dealt with normal individuals and did not make invidious distinctions. (less true than folks thought)

Emre does good job of documenting the disdain and condescension that ETS statisticians and validators had toward Isabel Myers.

Statisticians at ETS also challenged Myers on her misappropriation of introversion and extraversion, and her insistence that type never changed. And, ultimately, the whole idea of type as akin to species.

Inhouse critique: does use thinking, feeling, sensation, and intuition -- Jung's four basic psychological functions added judgement - perception but did not use terms the way he did and especially in the system of compounding the primary characteristics into a complex set of types -- flattened into caricatures of psychological theory.

logical extension of type thinking -- type would stiffen and standardize in its bid for universality. The more rapidly type circulated through knockoff tests the more its descriptions of personalities would reduce to one-word caricatures.[emre2018, p. 259]

promise of slotting into designated niches -- dystopian fiction of rational labor organization.

Adorno remains the guiding presence here -- although the F-Scale is . . . highly contested.
