keys for orthodox - neo dispute
— culture vs drive. Trilling position as  avoidance of conformity - issue had to do with political plans and consequences and possibilities of change. 
EF argued the limited value of discharge of sexual impulses. Part of his solution was plumbing sources of productivity in himself. Capacity could never be obliterated. 
[http://www.packal.org/search/site/copy%20url?page=5](http://www.packal.org/search/site/copy%20url?page=5)

Annotation of Wrong — Oversocialized.
Annotations of Wrong_PDF
underline [page 4]: "Hobbesian question— the "problem of order," as he calls it—at the very beginning of his first book,"
highlight [page 4]: "His solution, however, has tended to become precisely the kind of elaboration of a set of answers in ab- straction from questions that is so character- istic of contemporary sociological theory."
note [page 4]: "Parsons as abstractor."
underline [page 5]: "Constraint, therefore, is more than an environmental obstacle which the actor must take into account in pursuit of his goals in the same way that he takes into account physical laws: it becomes internal, psycho- logical, and self-imposed as well."
note [page 5]: "Uses a rather incidental piece of writing and textbooks because they simplify the issue and reveal the implicit assumptions."
highlight [page 6]: "The main explanatory function of the concept is to show how people repress themselves, imposing checks on their own de- sires and thus turning the inner life into a battlefield of conflicting motives, no matter which side "wins," by successfully dictating overt action. So far as behavior is concerned, the psychoanalytic view of man is less deterministic than the sociological. For psycho- analysis is primarily concerned with the inner life, not with overt behavior, and its most fundamental insight is that the wish, the emotion, and the fantasy are as important as the act in man's experience"
note [page 6]: "Condemns notion that internalization means learning or habit-formation. “The whole stress on inner conflict, on the tension between powerful impulses and superego controls the behavioral outcome of which cannot be prejudged, drops out of the pictures. {Wrong, 1961, #13900@187}"
note [page 6]: "internalization in Freud’s sense is that the individual will feel guilt if he does not live up to norm, not that he will {Wrong, 1961, #13900@187}"
note [page 6]: "What is overlooked here is that the person who conforms may be even more "bothered," that is, subject to guilt and neurosis, than the person who violates what are not only society's norms but his own as well. To Freud, it is precisely the man with the strictest superego, he who has most thoroughly internalized and conformed to the norms of his society, who is most wracked with guilt and anxiety. {Wrong, 1961, #13900@187}"
note [page 6]: "Key criticism “Deviant behavior is accounted for by special circum- stances: ambiguous norms, anomie, role con- flict, or greater cultural stress on valued goals than on the approved means for attaining them.” {Wrong, 1961, #13900@187}"
note [page 7]: "Notes that some fail to develop superegos and are in fact coerced into conformity."
underline [page 8]: "But his view that all men are to some degree both inner-directed and other-directed, a qualification that has been somewhat neglected by critics who have understandably concentrated on his empirical and historical use of his typology, suggests the more generalized conception of forces making for conformity found in current theory"
underline [page 8]: "" In some respects Riesman's conception of character is Freudian rather than neo- Freudian: character is defined by superego me- chanisms and, like Freud in Civilization and Its Discontents, the socialized individual is defined by what is forbidden him rather than by what society stimulates him to do. Thus in spite of Riesman's generally sanguine attitude towards modern Amer- ica, implicit in his typology is a view of society as the enemy both of individuality and of basic drive gratification, a view that contrasts with the at least potentially benign role assigned it by neo- Freudian thinkers like Fromm and Homey.""
note [page 8]: "On priority of socialized or social motives. When values are " inferred" from this em- phasis and then popularized, it becomes the basis of the ideology of " groupism" extolling the virtues of " togetherness" and "belongingness" that have been attacked and satirized so savagely in recent social criticism. {Wrong, 1961, #13900@188-9}"
note [page 8]: "Interesting."
underline [page 9]: "Man is increasingly seen as a "role-playing" creature, responding eagerly or anxiously to the expectations of other role-players in the multiple group settings in which he finds himself."
note [page 9]: "Role playing gets us complexity of differentiated social structure but ends up with a simplified social psychology."
note [page 10]: "Where are material interests, asks Wrong? {Wrong, 1961, #13900@191}"
underline [page 11]: "When Freud defined psychoanalysis as the study of the "vicissitudes of the in- stincts," he was confirming, not denying, the "plasticity" of human nature insisted on by social scientists. The drives or " instincts" of psychoanalysis, far from being fixed disposi- tions to behave in a particular way, are utterly subject to social channelling and transformation and could not even reveal themselves in behavior without social mold- ing any more than our vocal chords can produce articulate speech if we have not learned a language. To psychoanalysis man is indeed a social animal; his social nature is profoundly reflected in his bodily struc- ture. 34"
underline [page 11]: "To Freud man is a social animal without being entirely a so- cialized animal. His very social nature is the source of conflicts and antagonisms that create resistance to socialization by the norms of any of the societies which have existed in the course of human history."
underline [page 11]: "All men are so- cialized in the latter sense, but this does not mean that they have been completely molded by the particular norms and values of their culture."

Izenberg, _Identity_

Izenberg, Gerald

Identity: The necessity of a Modern Idea

Thesis 


Argument: 
Definitional History of term—mid-1950s term came to mean a quest for identity — “a search for self-definition conceived as a psychological state that had to be subjectively achieved.” Implied a loss of purpose and self-understanding that had once been given{Izenberg, 2016, #39690@4}

Separate from the self, but closely related. — From Seigel — self is the particular being any person is, draws the parts of our existence together, persists through changes, gives us sense of agency. 

From Handbook of Self and Identity— self is equivalent to the total person; identity is a person’s self-concept {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@10}
Virtues of Identity as a social science concept — Identity could bridge the seeming contradiction between causal explanation by objective social structures and explanation by the subjective motives of individual action.” {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@19}
psychological identity revolves around whether emotional well-being and effective action, depend on having a subjective, positive sense of identity. Components of such a sense of identity, developmental origins. Social What is the relationship between individual identity and the collectives we are inevitably part of? What kinds of collective identities are there and how do we define them? 
Term should aid our own sense of continuity by constantly reinterpreting ourselves to past and new selves. continual self-adjustment and existential need for ontological certainty but modernity predates identity as concept.
Existentialists and Erikson have different views of identity. Latter sees felt experience as key; former philosophical truth independent of that. {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@105-6}
For EE — identity is always social — individual identity is a variant of group {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@106}
EE: key definition. feeling of sameness of one’s substantive context through time. {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@107}
America as model-fashioning capital {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@113} culture and personality links.
Values be naturalized to be believes as universally and objectively valid. Must be seen to work; society through child-caring process provides permanence and solidity in values that enable self to orient itself to reality and effective action. Values are now enacted as personal imperatives. {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@115}
EE — dislikes machine, not so much capitalism as threat to organicism. favors unique individuality and cultural creativity Humboldtian, Tocquevillian mix
healthy ideology — flexible and inclusive cementing group cohesion and permitting personal change. Unhealthy ideologies were totalism and revolved around absolute beliefs.
For EE, the key was a rational ego in control against demands from biology and conscience. Ego had picked up tools and powers that enabled it to gratified bodily needs and protect the self {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@118} ego was under A. Freud both outward oriented agency and unifying function. Yet still biological drives not subjective need for self-definition {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@119}
EE’s identity not merely a substructure of one agency of the self; it was the self. Freudian metapsychology had no superordinate structure uniting id, ego, and superego other than that of the organism, a biological category; it had no psychological self other than the psychic apparatus of the organism, which consisted of psychological representatives of the biological drives and their objects. Id, ego, and superego might be understood as reifications of modes of acting of a subjective self, but the self as such was not, and as things stood could not be, theorized within the structural model in psychoanalysis.” {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@119}
{Izenberg, 2016, #39690@120} discuss how even in the first three (most nearly Freudian) stages issue is laying out subjective feeling that build toward identity rather than gratifications. so oedipal stage drops rivalry and becomes about moral sense that could let self have horizon. 
importance of permanent threat of rootlessness. Eriksonian quest for identity is a quest for a sense of solid rootedness. Absolutist ideologies seek to abolish anxiety altogether by erroneously denying the limitations of human finitude. Worry about surplus anxiety “We can say that for Erkson, identity was the solution to the anxiety of psychological self-alienation, of not feeling one with oneself, that exceeded the inescapable minimum alienation and anxiety of the human condition.” {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@121}
interesting discussion of identification — what does it mean assuming sameness with someone else — why would I do that? ends with I am . . . For Erikson, identity is the process of self-making — of assuming some and dropping other identifications. “Each provisional identity synthesis of childhood is undermined by the new possibilities and demands of succeeding stages, which must be integrated into the old. But in adolescence, on the verge of entering into the world of adult choices and responsibilities, the young person is challenged to decide . . . which to accept and which to rejected inorder to become who he will finally be.” {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@122} 
resolve conflicts between identifications rather than with instincts. {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@125} much more work than love in identity crisis. for psychic health subjective psychological striving the measure. 
points to youth culture as contrast to conformity and consensus. pluralistic experience {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@132-3}
Success made depression era imperatives outmoded and hence identity and identifications no longer automatic. 
Discussion of Laing — self  protected by pulling out from interactions but that only leads to more cravings — protecting the self at the expense of depriving it of connection with others — the upshot is superficial contact with others while preserving the inner self as inviolate. But the real self increasingly becomes outside the realm of interaction and is not validated by others as hence becomes a fantasy. {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@140-1}
In conclusion, GI notes that identity promised stability but also constant openness to modification. choice and change are part of the reality principle but they run against stability. {Izenberg, 2016, #39690@143}

Keywords: psychology; Erikson, Erik H. 1902-1994.; social psychology; Psychosocial; politics

**Undeveloped Selves**
The 1950s and teenagers go together, not only in popular histories and bad television shows but in the thought of the time. They assumed psychosocial importance not just because of worries their ability to handle the challenges of adulthood but also because the second decade of life was a time when the balance between self and body and between self and others simultaneously presented vexing difficulties. On the one hand, teens had to negotiate hormonal changes and sexual desire. On the other, they were faced with the often exasperating problems of fitting in both with friends and peers and having a sense of what they would be. The convergence made the self in the teen years as potentially imbalanced and decentered as any point in an individual’s life. 
As Joseph Kett has demonstrated Americans were relatively unaccustomed to thinking of the teen years as a distinct period devoted to experimentation and preparation for adulthood or that puberty was accompanied by turbulence. Indeed the term teenager did not come into common use until the early[^1] The first full articulation of youth as a transitional state suspended between childhood and adulthood was the psychologist G. Stanley Hall’s _Adolescence _(1904). Hall understood the condition as one of storm and stress, marked by conflict with parents, mood swings, and risky behavior. “Youth,” he wrote, “awakes to a new world and understands neither it nor himself.”⁠[^2]
By midcentury, Hall’s concept had become a fixture in Americans’ conception of the life cycle. In light of their near universally shared experience of high school and a seemingly common culture revolving around youth preferences in clothing, music, language and deportment, teenagers seemed a cohort apart. Uniformity among teens was no doubt exaggerated by young and old alike but scouting parties to land of the young often came back with reports that caused consternation that the current crop of teens would not mature, adopt adult norms, and assume their proper social and political roles.. Some worried that American teenagers were performing academically well below their Soviet counterparts, opting for frivolous pursuits and fun, fun, fun rather than real, meaningful achievement.[^3] Still others fretted over general rowdiness as with the hysteria surrounding Elvis Presley and the property destruction that followed in the wake of the “Rock Around the Clock” opening to Richard Brooks’s _Blackboard Jungle_. When linked to rise in juvenile crime, such episodes created a sense of urgency in understanding the young. There was, however, no agreement on whether peer pressure, mass-culture manipulation, or poor discipline were to blame.[^4]
The baleful effects of peer pressure were highlighted in James Coleman’s _Adolescent Society_ (1961), which was based on his observation of ten Chicago-era high schools. Few in the immediate postwar period articulated as thoroughly as Coleman what he termed the countercultural nature of the American teenager. In his telling, the adolescent time-out period so segregated high schoolers from the rest of society that their age cohort made them similar no matter how much they differed in race, income, or whether their school district was fundamentally urban or rural. Pointing to the triviality of their concerns, Coleman was especially taken with his subjects minute attention to the judgment of others. These other-directed personalities in training were consumers par excellence, interested only in making the proper impression at sporting events and dances. Much to Coleman’s dismay, they treated academic success as something that condemned one to social marginality, prime facie evidence of being subservient to parents. Teen culture, Coleman concluded, even when not openly delinquent was at odds with the goals and institutions of proper adolescence and with adult life.⁠[^5]
Coleman’s evidence, however, suggested other interpretations. As Bennett Berger noted in an incisive 1963 review, Coleman missed much of the similarities between adolescents and their parents and misunderstood the goals that many had set for high school. Berger rightly noted that adults were very much interested in cars, clothes, the opposite sex, and sports. Football, he pointed out, had a better chance of creating community solidarity than academic achievements, which were too individualized and specialized to serve that purpose. Nor did Coleman credit how sports appealed to teenagers’ desire to differentiate themselves from their parents through physical success that their parents could no longer achieve. For all that, there was plenty of evidence to indicate that the kids were alright. A majority of Coleman’s respondents indicated that they preferred the parent-approved Pat Boone over Elvis Presley by a wide margin and claimed that they would rather risk breaking with a friend than earning their parents’ disapproval.⁠[^6]
If Coleman gave scholarly support to the peer pressure explanation for teenagers, psychiatrist Frederic Wertham played a similar role in his critique of commercial culture. has achieved notoriety among later generations for its extremism. Had Wertham not written his scathing attack on comic books, _The Seduction of the Innocent_, he would have been remembered, if remembered at all, as a committed social democratic who established a well-known clinic in Harlem named for Karl Marx’s son-in-law, the only psychiatrist willing to testify on Ethel Rosenberg’s behalf, a writer whose study of psychopathic murder attracted the enthusiastic attention of Thomas Mann and Arthur Miller, and forensic defender of Frank Santana, a Puerto Rican gang member who killed a rival, Billy Blankenship, in a street fight, a case that formed the immediate inspiration for _West Side Story_.[^7] His reputation, however, rests on his sensational expose of the damage done by gruesome comic books. Having noticed that the young criminals he treated read comics avidly, he was surprised to find that they were not funny but filled with sadomasochistic and sexualized images that glorified violence.  Immersed in the contemporary psychosocial interpretation of fascism, Wertham insisted that comics exploited the lack of ego strength of their readers and prompted the creation of a self prone to manipulation by authority. So Superman’s S linked him to the SS because of the fascist ubermensch fantasies at play. A little more plausibly he located latent homoerotic tendencies in the Batman and Robin stories. Driven by the profit motive, comic-book entrepreneurs were so little concern with their product that a twelve-year old could answer the age-old question of what he wanted to be with “a sex maniac.” Wertham was probably not so gullible to think the comic would cause deviant interest or crime; he was, however, certain that they coarsened the sensibilities of even normal children. “Pouring sordid stories into the minds of children is not the same as pouring water over a duck’s back.⁠”[^8]  Accused later of advocating censorship, Wertham is perhaps better understood as engaged in the social democratic project of protecting vulnerable selves so that they might achieve normality, which is why C. Wright Mills praised the book as a “most commendable use of the professional mind in service of the public.”⁠[^9] 
Psychiatrist Marynia Farnham, co-author of the anti-feminist _Modern Woman: The Lost Sex_, provided centered explanation for the problem in _The Adolescent_ (1951). Adolescence was a struggle to establish a unique personality capable of self-reliance and self-direction but that effort was stymied by the tension between physical maturity and social impositions that restricted teenage sexual activity so as to limit pregnancies that teenagers could not financially support. As would Coleman a decade later, Farnham saw the timeout filled with psychological extravagances. Farnham might have advocated tearing down prohibitions and making birth control legal or rearranging work relations. Instead she preferred enforced restraint and more adult supervision. In part, this recommendation allowed her to excoriate women who have “deserted the home for the supposedly more   rewarding and exiting life of rivalry with men” and on parents who had not provided guidelines and believed that “youngsters can make all decisions for themselves and that uncurbed freedom is their right from birth on.”[^10] In the end, however, Farnham’s advice came down to generalities — parents needed to understand their youngsters’ personalities, demand greater responsibility from them, and not be afraid to exercise authority. 
Farnham was unusual among most professionals writing on adolescents in at least considering the female of the species. How to be a man in a changing world was said to be extraordinarily difficult; how to become a woman much less so. Boys’ aspirations and obstacles attracted finely honed attention; girls were relegated to women’s media. Commentators believed that the concerns of female adolescents were boys, popularity, and beauty, which they dismissed as frivolous or sheer consumerism. That such concerns might touch upon legitimate problems about relationships that women (and men) needed to resolve was rarely considered. Problems of work for women were not asked at all. In his introduction to his classic _Growing Up Absurd_, Paul Goodman insisted that women did not grow up absurd since they “will have children which is absolutely self-justifying, like any other natural or creative act.” Further, he went on in the introduction, the problems of teenage boys were “intensely interesting to women, for if the boys do not grow up to be men, where shall the women find men?”⁠[^11] 
Farnham and Coleman were representative of one response to the teenage problem. They favored what might be called a conformist strategy of creating disciplined ways of easing unruly adolescents into their adult responsibilities. Their understanding of self-reliance and self-direction occasioned little questioning of American middle-class ideals but rather created the means by which adolescents could reach maturity in the unknown and unpredictable that modernity presented them.  On the other hand, there were those who put more emphasis on teenagers achieving personal integration during the period, centering the self as it were. They rejected the position of school counselors and advice columnists that adolescence had a predetermined end and treat the struggles of the American young as indicative of a society that failed to cultivate avenues by which a mature self could form. The two sides differed less in the results they desired than in the emphasis, less in the hope for individual achievement of maturation than how it was achieved and what it meant for the self. Judged by Sixties standards of “do your own thing,” both groups demurred, albeit with differing degrees of sympathy. Judged on their own terms, the differences in the politics of adolescence were substantial.
The most prominent and influential midcentury exploration of adolescence, Erik Erikson’s _Childhood and Society_ (1950) fell into the latter camp. It simultaneously laid out a normal and expected developmental pattern and criticized American practices for stymieing meaningful independence. Erikson was born in 1902 in Frankfort, uncertain who was his father. He migrated in 1927 to Vienna in order to teach at a school designed for children whose parents were in treatment with Anna Freud.⁠[^12] At her urging, he enrolled at the Vienna Psychoanalytic Institute, where he received his diploma in 1933. Harassed by the Nazis, he and his wife, Joan, set sail for the United States that same year. He used his contacts with anthropologists with a culture and personality bent — Edward Sapir, Margaret Mead, Alfred Kroeber, and Ruth Benedict —to observe the Sioux and the Yoruk. The effect could be seen in _Childhood and Society_’s emphasis on the culture-bound nature of personality development. Critical of efforts to enforce conformity by edict, he left the University of California in the early 1950s in protest of the requirement that faculty sign loyalty oaths. 
_Childhood and Society_ laid out a set of eight stages of life, each of which linked biological development to what Erikson termed a psychosocial crisis. As individuals attempt to master bodily functions or life tasks under the terms that a culture lays out for them, they encounter a set of conflicts that raise existential questions. So the initial stage of life in which the infant struggles with oral mastery and negotiates between inside and outside is rooted in the relationship with the mother and raises the question of trust. Subsequent stages involve bowel control or exploration and tool use and open up issues of autonomy, initiative and guilt. Erikson’s sequence is cumulative with each stage building on previous ones. Successful negotiation of the crisis of each stage yields rewards or “virtues.” A child who negotiates the trust - mistrust psychosocial challenge will emerge with hope. Passing through the second stage with a sense of autonomy rather than shame or doubt would, for instance, bestow the virtue of will. Although Erikson posed one pole of the challenge as the optimal or desirable force, he was well aware that both were needed for healthy living. Some mistrust of others is surely warranted as is retaining some reserves of shame and doubt. Those who could not balance psychosocial forces or interact with the outside in productive ways could, Erikson maintained, pass on to the next stage but the residue of the unsuccessful challenge would reassert itself in problems in later life.⁠[^13]
Where Freudians saw personality formed by the conflicts between nature and social demands in the early years of life from which individuals develop a characteristic repertoire of psychic responses, Erikson treated each stage as important in its own right. Working from the position that the ego had its own claims and was not necessarily at the mercy of the more powerful id and superego, Erikson contended that adolescence was not simply a consequence of Oedipal struggles but an important component of an ongoing process. Indeed, given Erikson’s insistence that identity was necessary to the feeling of being alive, one might conclude that the four prior stages led up to the crucial work of adolescence and the three subsequent ones expressed and expanded the identity that developed in adolescence. Adolescence, as Erikson portrayed it, coincided with puberty  and extended to roughly nineteen. It was the time that individuals confronted the tension between Identity and Role Confusion. Adolescents had to resolve the question of who they were and what they could be, despite their heightened concern about how they appear to others. The stage is initially confusing since adolescents have to link memories of past selves with anticipations of future ones while taking full measure of new physical and mental powers on the one hand and social expectations on the other. If the task is frustrated, anti-social and destructive behavior might well be the result. As complicated as the stage can be — something to which an increasing number of parents could attest — most adolescents  find an identity. Crucial to success is parental allowance for experimentation. Those who do open up space for a “moratorium” will generally find that their children have developed a full-blown identity in which they have reestablished boundaries and learned to negotiate with a sometimes hostile world. 
Although adolescence took place during a specific point in the life cycle and entailed finding identity, Erikson insisted that the content of adolescence was by no means universal. Based on his observations of the Sioux, the Yurok, the Germans, and the Americans, Erikson concluded that adolescence was  less a destination than a way of constituting and reconstituting fragmentary selves. The components of adolescence and the preferable outcomes of the stage’s psychosocial conflict could not be settled by an appeal to nature. In fact, Erikson maintained, the very purpose of identity was to help individuals adapt to historical change. Where Freudians saw individuals perpetually caught between biology and society and at odds with themselves, Erikson could imagine a number of reasonably successful resolutions of identity crises. 
Erikson did think adolescence would always be more or less tumultuous and change in the personality of the adolescent would be slow in coming. Still, adolescence need not, he maintained, be as severe and disorienting as it is in the United States. American social conditions left far too many adolescents ill equipped to be adults. Like many Europeans, he was struck by the American belief that individuals could start from scratch and reinvent themselves with no reference to past conditions or events. Determined to be unique, but lacking long-standing and meaningful institutions to guide the transitions (especially since rapid American social change renders existing ones ineffective) and eager to prepare themselves for success in the machine age (which, in Erikson’s view, entailed submission to the logic of systems), Americans ironically end up followers, molding themselves into what is available. The upshot, according to Erikson, was that U. S. teenagers were particularly susceptible to being “overadjusted,” pushed to conformity and premature resolution of the psychosocial crisis by excessive social pressure, which he often referred to as “a social jungle of human existence.” The culprit, Erikson charged, was “Mom” (punctuation in the original), a composite, stereotypical entity who managed her children’s lives, laying down rigid moral and behavior supposedly designed to help her children become independent. Instead, such parenting had the effect of making teens feel abandoned at one level and guilty of abandoning their mothers at another.⁠[^14]
Edgar Z. Friedenberg’s 1959 extension of Erikson, _The Vanishing Adolescent_, was less worried about maturation than the freedom to experiment itself.[^15] Where Coleman saw adolescence as self-contained, impervious to the outside world, Friedenberg discerned adult control channeling teenagers into socially acceptable ends, with the result that adolescence was not carrying out its proper role. Unlike simple societies and lower-class subcultures, intricate social organizations require an extended testing process so people can master roles. Freidenberg insisted that only by setting one’s self against the social order can an individual develop stable, clear ego identity that enables him to realize “the complex, subtle, and precious difference between himself and his environment” (13). The _sturm und drang_ of the stage may be extended, but it need not escalate in a war. The ideal resolution, Friedenberg asserted, was a profound sense of self; teenagers needed to act like aristocrats, not exactly imperious but self-assured (10).⁠
American society, Friedenberg maintained, was dedicated to defusing the clash, which is one reason he expressed a fondness for British schools, which gave “adolescents something to be adolescent about” (5).⁠ Instead of tests in a relatively protected environment, American adolescents were handed a pre-packaged, ready-made adult-in-training kit in which one got the appearance of adulthood with none of the difficulties. Institutions intended for adolescents treated discord and disagreement as socially disintegrative. Such institutions pointed to adult fears and anxieties rather than to any dangers posed to the young. If the disagreement was allowed to unfold properly, Friedenberg asserted, it would actually strengthen society by producing individuals who were truly authentic and capable of deeply felt relationships to other individuals. 
Although ostensibly a criticism of the American high school, the book drew on few direct observations of schools themselves. Friedenberg’s target was rather a culture that insisted on uniformity. As such, success in American life depended upon on defusing tensions and satisfying others rather than oneself. In valuing unity, American culture disparaged dissent and led people to avoid risking their future chances. Friedenberg charged other-directed America prevented individuals from distinguishing themselves from their environment, a tendency exacerbated by a consumerism in which ready-made goods substituted for development of competencies. The space in which teenagers could develop a strong sense of self shrunk accordingly. Friedenberg did not think adolescents would disappear entirely. Exceptional kids would remain. He chronicled five of them in the book. But for most, the outlook for independence and authenticity was growing dimmer.
Paul Goodman’s _Growing Up Absurd_ , a book often grouped with _The Vanishing Adolescent_, did not envision Friendenberg-like walling off from society. Instead the anarchist and Gestalt therapist Goodman saw the possibility of re-creating society on a human scale, the inverse of the rigid and dehumanizing American society. It failed to provide meaningful work with its “old-fashioned” personal virtues of honesty, independence and caring. Schools, in Goodman’s view, were factories of impulse suppression, not sites of creativity. Goodman was particularly attuned to the denial of sexuality. Goodman’s Gestalt commitments led him to advocate a self that expanded its boundaries, probing the division between itself and society. No youth institution reliably allowed for that activity. Because they grew up without the ability to mold the world to their liking, the humanity of American young men was stifled. Without a remaking of the world of work and love, socialization into adulthood was mere adjustment and perpetual ego deficit.Yet Goodman hardly celebrated role confusion. Those who resisted adjustment were, by his reckoning, either resigned (the beats) or fatalistic (delinquents). Ending absurdity required finishing what he called “the missed revolutions of modern times,” which would enable the young to strike the “right balance.”
Like Erikson, Friedenberg and Goodman, Washington University anthropologist Jules Henry lamented the inability of America society to provide institutions that allowed for independent selves. The adolescence sections of his _Culture Against Man _(1963), based on his observations of St. Louis area high schools, revealed how the essence of the teen years was insecurity. More than any other analyst, Henry captured the silent terror of adolescence. Writing with a socially aware Freudianism and a serious commitment to the well being of teenage girls, Henry attributed much difficulty to the constant mobility of American life and the general fickleness of Id-Creatures seeking immediate pleasure. Friendships were therefore quite unstable, and leading to an inadequacy felt on the prom dance floor and automobile backseats. Parental shortcomings lay less, a la Farnham, in the absence of parental disciple than in parental failure to establish and live out meaningful lives. This inability of adults to provide ego ideals, Henry argued, created a void that peers filled. Girls were especially affected in adolescence. The difficulty lay not so much in limited goals since beauty, fashion, and popularity struck him as being quite capable of generating a meaningful and creative femininity but that adults paradoxically goaded girls into sexual competition to snare the right husband but condemned those who slipped out of line.⁠[^16]
Henry located another consequence of the lack of ego ideals in the aversion of teenagers to work. The example of “hard-working daddies” who are “little at home and burdened with the irritations, coronaries, and ulcers of their work” only underwrote pleasure-seeking behavior. Schools, too, were inadequate in setting meaningful ideals. School work was generally unchallenging and meaningless, and even the boy or girl who did take school seriously found him or herself faced with other demands from friends, the opposite sex, and family. Studying, especially when nagged to do so by parents, made Henry’s informants feel at the will of others. Promise of future benefits from school work only compounded the feeling. Yet because adolescents neither developed their own standards of success or were involved in institutions in which the standards were meaningful to their talents or aspirations, grades loomed large in their education and work life. Unconnected to developing needs, grading accustomed students to accept impersonal, standardized norms as natural measure of oneself. This complex bequeathed a feeling of inadequacy to the majority.  Nor did pleasure seeking yield long-term ends and augured poorly for most emerging from the moratorium of adolescence with a coherent and rounded personality. 
Social scientists and critics were not the only groups fascinated with the problem of adolescents; novelists and film makers were also. The era was filled with numerous works, some of which have continued to appeal to readers and viewers. No single position unites such novels _The Adventures of Augie March_, _Catcher in the Rye_, _The Bell Jar_, _Goodbye, Columbus_, _On the Road_, _To Kill a Mockingbird_, _A Separate Peace_, and _Rabbit Run_ or films _Rebel Without A Cause_, _The Wild One_, _The Blackboard Jungle_, _I Was a Teenage Werewolf_, and _Splendor in the Grass_, save their evocation of a universe in which teens and young adults are not at home. Some were designed to provide material for a now significant segment of popular audience, teens themselves. Others were vehicles to imagine harmonious reconciliation. Others still made teenagers the epitome of the wide problem of loneliness and alienation or commentators on the lack of integrity in adult lives. 
Although the postwar artwork shared with earlier coming-of-age stories the conventions of a confused and unsettled protagonist and a distant and seemingly implacable social order, the novels and films of the mid-twentieth century departed from the models of the classic _bildungsroman_ and _kunstlerroman_. Those were novels of formation and growth of self. Narrated in the third person, connoting the objective truth of the situation, classic youth novels ended with the protagonists wiser and more understanding than when they began, their skills in negotiating the vicissitudes of life enhanced. Where they had begun their journey set against a society that seemingly had no place for them, they usually ended with a better sense of where they fit in and who they were. Their hard-won maturity enabled them to avoid repeating the mistakes of youth. Even when the youthful protagonist dies — the result of an unresolvable conflict often entailing unrequited love, the upshot is a lesson about how things are with the world. Of the novels, films, and plays of adolescent crisis that were popular among subsequent generations (or at least teachers of subsequent generations), perhaps only John Knowles’s _Separate Peace_ (1959) harkened back to nineteenth-century traditions of character formation.
Much of the significant postwar artwork centered around adolescents, on the other hand, lacked the same confident teleology. Written in the first person or shot with a subjective camera, midcentury novels and films were statements of feeling, perceptions, and partial understandings of the narrator. As titles such as _On the Road_ and _Rabbit Run_ indicate, movement, not arrival, is the major emphasis of the novel and the crucial condition of the protagonists. Many central figures ranging from Holden Caulfield to David of James Baldwin’s Giovanni’s Room fail to develop an ego identity or even to articulate what maturity would look like. Even those whose lives are not particularly angst-ridden, like Bellow’s _Augie March_, are noteworthy for their unsettled nature and their formless selves. March’s picaresque tale — which features escapades that span Chicago poolrooms, Mexican deserts, and service in the Merchant Marine —like his unformed self, lacks a destination or goal. Throughout these works, the identity crisis functioned as part rejection of conventional social norms and roles and part claim to distinctively authentic existence. Maturity rarely emerges as a solution to the adolescents’ condition. Instead, many advanced a fantasy of a permanent adolescence in which adult behavioral norms are never embraced. Permanent adolescence conferred a special status as honest, even if he or she did not often tell the truth, or a dissident, even if he or she rallied around no principles save a generalized resistance.⁠[^17]
Nicholas Ray’s _Rebel Without a Cause_ (1955), the story of twenty-four hours in the life of troubled teenager Jim Stark, envisioned teen angst as a reaction to the failure of adults to show meaningful concern for their children or provide appropriate gender roles. Known  for James Dean’s star turn in which he combined daring, anger, pain, and an expressive adolescent inarticulateness, the movie often seemed like Farnham in technicolor. Stark’s brushes with the law and his marked inability to make friends at other schools have led the family to move to Los Angeles. At the heart of his troubles is the gender trouble all around him. His cold and demanding mother clearly dominates his father, who backs down in nearly every argument rather than live with unpleasantness. The point is driven home in the scene in which he wears an apron (and Ray makes it a particularly frilly full-length one, which the father (Jim Backus) wears over his suit) while doing chores around the house. Throughout, Jim asks his father what do you have to do to be a man, a question his father does not, and apparently can not, answer. The lack of guidance leads Jim to complain to the earnest arresting officer that his father wants to be his pal and wishes that his dad would haul off and hit his mother just once and set things straight. No one, he concludes, could grow up in a circus like that. His parents’ mixed messages, he howls after being brought to jail for public drunkenness, are tearing him apart. 
The subsequent day at school goes no better, as he becomes ensnared in a fight with the school bully, Buzz. The clash escalates over the course of the evening in a “chickie run,” a race in two stolen cars towards a cliff that is won by being the last to jump out, in which Buzz dies. His attempt to tell his parents what happened is a festival of miscommunication. Efforts to report the incident to the police backfire and in the course of a tumultuous evening Jim joins with the equally troubled Judy (Natalie Wood — whose efforts to kiss her father are greeted with pushes and slaps) and Plato (Sal Mineo — whose father abandoned the family) in an abandoned mansion to play fantasy family with the quite traditional roles. As Buzz’s gang breaks up the game, fighting escalates and eventually Plato, who is extraordinarily agitated and has been brandishing his mother’s pistol, is shot by the police while wearing Jim’s trademark red jacket, which lead the Starks, brought to the scene by the police, to believe initially he was shot. They soon see Jim weeping over Plato’s death, prompting his father to comfort him and to vow to be a better parent. The possibility that Jim may indeed grow up is hinted at when he introduces Judy to his family. 
Holden Caulfied, the archetypal protagonist of _Catcher in the Rye_, seems less likely to resolve his adolescent crisis and form a genuine adult self. In his moral insistence and emotional vulnerability, Holden exemplifies the traits that made teenagers both fascinating and exasperating. He is prone to maudlin displays of concern and tremendous remorse — apparent in his trek through Central Park to find where the ducks go in winter and his subsequent breaking the record bought for his sister Phoebe, indifferent to school and achievement and drawn to such unrealistic plans as living in the wilderness. Although superficially aware of adult practices (drinking in night clubs, going to Broadway plays, staying alone in a hotel), Holden is nonetheless uncomfortable with adult status. He is sexually inexperienced (part of the narrative entails his failed efforts to lose his virginity and his anger at roommates who are cavalier in their relations with women). In addition, he envisions sexuality as an unwarranted aggression on the innocence and generosity of children. He recoils at obscene graffiti on the merry - go- round and imagines himself as protector of the purity of children, wanting to be the guardian of children playing an unspecified game in a rye field on the edge of a cliff. Rejecting that advice of a former teacher that an immature man wishes to die of a noble cause while a mature one hopes to live humbly for one, he embraces the stasis of the Eskimos in the diorama at the Natural History museum, wishing that he too could stay the same. 
Holden’s indictment of adulthood is among the best known parts of the book. Almost everyone who has read it — whether he or she admires him for his truth telling or recoils from his whininess — remembers his tendency to label others (and at times himself) as phony. The phrase became part of the lexicon of midcentury because it pithily encapsulated the postwar concern with authenticity and the representative role of adolescents in feeling their way toward it. Phonies cheat at the Eriksonian task of balancing expression of self with social involvement. They adopt socially acceptable behavior not from essential commitment but for material and personal gain. Their concern for others derives from their sense that such gestures are social expected. Holden applies the word seemingly indiscriminately, grouping his roommate Stradlater who takes advantage of girls and the headmaster who insincerely greets odd-looking parents with patrons who cheer wildly for false, inauthentic things such as the Rockettes’ precision dancing, Lunt-Fontaine performances, or the nightclub pianist Ernie’s predictable flourishes on the other. Adults might well judge the insincerity in dealing with others a more serious (if sometimes necessary) offense than bad taste. In Holden’s world, however, both groups are equally products of a social world of artifice and manipulation in which spontaneity, real joy, kindness, and wholeness are absent. Holden, in contrast, champions a world of authenticity in which people acted as they really were.⁠[^18]
As committed as he is to authenticity, Holden is still very much a vulnerable adolescent. Protecting his faint sense of who he really is often leads him into actions that are themselves phony. As he himself admits, he is the “the most terrific liar you ever saw.” Indeed he dissembles constantly. Some lies are designed to conform to social norms as when he tells the mother of the “biggest bastard that ever went to Pency” that her son is both popular and modest because he thinks she is nice and does not want to puncture her illusions. Other lies are cruel as when he punishes the shallow women from Seattle by telling them that they just missed seeing the actor Gary Cooper. Still other falsehoods deflect attention away from Holden’s actual situation. Personal communication is fraught for Holden because it risks bringing up painful memories of his brother Allie’s death and exacerbating his uneasiness with himself. It is also fraught because Holden posses enough self awareness to realize his own propensity for phoniness. Locked in the dilemma, all he can imagine is going West and living as a deaf mute. Alienation, normally an obstacle to coming to terms with oneself and one’s feelings, is here the guarantor of authenticity and the protector of identity against both change and social expectations. The enduring popularity of the novel among adults speaks to the desire to step out of adult roles and remove oneself from adulthood, which is why some talk of adolescence as an kind of ethnicity.[^19]
Critics have touted Sylvia Plath’s Bell Jar (1963) as the female version of Catcher and the similarities are clear.⁠[^20] Esther Greenwood, the protagonist of the novel, shares with Holden Caulfield a profound alienation from the adult world and from herself. Like him, she judges others as inauthentic and like him, she has no sense of what she wants to be. The publication history of both books were parallel. Both were turned down by the publishers that originally commissioned their work with Salinger’s editor telling him that he could not tell if Holden was supposed to be crazy or not and Plath’s labeling hers “disappointing, juvenile, and overwrought.” Both authors were thought to identify with their lead characters. Although famously a recluse, Salinger did try to peddle a stage version with the provision that he play Holden. Plath drew many of the details from her own life and committed suicide shortly after the British publication. 
Yet the social world that Esther finds so oppressive is only partially the one that Holden believes is filled with phonies. The inauthenticity that Plath details takes on a special complexion because it is women’s roles that Esther finds particularly oppressive. Winner of a prestigious summer internship at a New York woman’s magazine, _Ladies Day_, Esther is unmoved by what other girls would have regarded as a dream chance, feeling only “still and empty’ (2). Unlike her fellow interns, she rejects traditional goals. When asked what she wants to be, she can only manage that she doesn’t know. Female identity as conventionally advanced repels her, provoking horrifying images. She compares marriage and children rearing to being “brainwashed” in which “you went about numb as a slave in some private totalitarian state” (81). Childbirth is akin to being trapped in a “long, blind, doorless and windowless corridor of pain” (p. 62). The double standard infuriates her and she labels her boy friend Buddy a “hypocrite” when he admits he is not a virgin and breaks off their engagement. Losing her virginity to a tall but not very good looking mathematician in Cambridge leads to hemorrhaging and a trip to the hospital. In short, she regards the female existence as being under a bell jar — an image she uses to describe her own empty, airless, suspended experience but applies later to the college girls who played bridge, gossip, and studied (227). That application has a double edge — both setting Esther apart (her distinctiveness lies in her ability to see the bell jar) and establishing possible similarities with others. 
Her lack of traditional feminine desires prompts her to undertake an unsuccessful search for meaning. Her quest to be a writer comes to naught when she is rejected for a summer class at Harvard taught by a famous writer. Finding nothing satisfying, she veers toward madness that liberates her from the social imperatives imposed upon middle-class women. It also runs the risk of obliterating the internal self altogether. Where Holden aspires to be isolated or in a perpetual adolescent state, Esther struggles to be able to say I am. At times she feels a zombie inside her, preventing her from speaking or writing, convinced that her deteriorating penmanship is the sign of insanity that she needs to hide from her doctor. Her suicide attempts fail by her account because her body will not obey her mind. Where traditionally the mind (or head) has been regarded as the scene of the self, Esther experiences what Abigail Cheever has called “a profound disintegration” in which her body and her mind are not working in tandem; her rationality gone, her existence is affirmed by the acts of her body. Contending that it has “little tricks,” she sets as her goal escaping being “trapped in its stupid cage for fifty years” left “without any sense at all” (153).
As her disintegration worsens, she enters treatment with an arrogant, self-absorbed and unfeeling male psychiatrist. He freely uses electroshock therapy, which Esther experiences as hellish torture. Walking out rather than go through with more of the same, she continues her efforts at suicide. Eventually she comes close enough to succeeding by taking fifty sleeping pills at once and hiding in her cellar, which results in her confinement in a private hospital. There, after a successful electroshock treatment and an empathetic therapy with a female doctor, she  finally comes to a tenuous and fragile grip on normality, being able to say at a funeral of a friend who successfully committed suicide, “I am, I am, I am.” which she ascribes to “the old brag of my heart.” Where her mother insists she treat her illness as if it were a bad dream, she counters to herself that she can not since is was part of her. By retaining a sense of her madness, Esther emphasizes her distance from social roles, even as she gets ready to be released into the social world and lead what others might term a normal existence. Yet the content of her character remains sketchy at best. Nor is it certain that she will not try suicide again. As such, Esther Greenwood serves as a stark example of how fragile growing up could be.⁠

￼ 

**Undeveloped Selves**
The 1950s and teenagers go together, not only in popular histories and bad television shows but in the thought of the time. They assumed psychosocial importance not just because of worries their ability to handle the challenges of adulthood but also because the second decade of life was a time when the balance between self and body and between self and others simultaneously presented vexing difficulties. On the one hand, teens had to negotiate hormonal changes and sexual desire. On the other, they were faced with the often exasperating problems of fitting in both with friends and peers and having a sense of what they would be. The convergence made the self in the teen years as potentially imbalanced and decentered as any point in an individual’s life. 
As Joseph Kett has demonstrated Americans were relatively unaccustomed to thinking of the teen years as a distinct period devoted to experimentation and preparation for adulthood or that puberty was accompanied by turbulence. Indeed the term teenager did not come into common use until the early[^21] The first full articulation of youth as a transitional state suspended between childhood and adulthood was the psychologist G. Stanley Hall’s _Adolescence _(1904). Hall understood the condition as one of storm and stress, marked by conflict with parents, mood swings, and risky behavior. “Youth,” he wrote, “awakes to a new world and understands neither it nor himself.”⁠[^22]
By midcentury, Hall’s concept had become a fixture in Americans’ conception of the life cycle. In light of their near universally shared experience of high school and a seemingly common culture revolving around youth preferences in clothing, music, language and deportment, teenagers seemed a cohort apart. Uniformity among teens was no doubt exaggerated by young and old alike but scouting parties to land of the young often came back with reports that caused consternation that the current crop of teens would not mature, adopt adult norms, and assume their proper social and political roles.. Some worried that American teenagers were performing academically well below their Soviet counterparts, opting for frivolous pursuits and fun, fun, fun rather than real, meaningful achievement.[^23] Still others fretted over general rowdiness as with the hysteria surrounding Elvis Presley and the property destruction that followed in the wake of the “Rock Around the Clock” opening to Richard Brooks’s _Blackboard Jungle_. When linked to rise in juvenile crime, such episodes created a sense of urgency in understanding the young. There was, however, no agreement on whether peer pressure, mass-culture manipulation, or poor discipline were to blame.[^24]
The baleful effects of peer pressure were highlighted in James Coleman’s _Adolescent Society_ (1961), which was based on his observation of ten Chicago-era high schools. Few in the immediate postwar period articulated as thoroughly as Coleman what he termed the countercultural nature of the American teenager. In his telling, the adolescent time-out period so segregated high schoolers from the rest of society that their age cohort made them similar no matter how much they differed in race, income, or whether their school district was fundamentally urban or rural. Pointing to the triviality of their concerns, Coleman was especially taken with his subjects minute attention to the judgment of others. These other-directed personalities in training were consumers par excellence, interested only in making the proper impression at sporting events and dances. Much to Coleman’s dismay, they treated academic success as something that condemned one to social marginality, prime facie evidence of being subservient to parents. Teen culture, Coleman concluded, even when not openly delinquent was at odds with the goals and institutions of proper adolescence and with adult life.⁠[^25]
Coleman’s evidence, however, suggested other interpretations. As Bennett Berger noted in an incisive 1963 review, Coleman missed much of the similarities between adolescents and their parents and misunderstood the goals that many had set for high school. Berger rightly noted that adults were very much interested in cars, clothes, the opposite sex, and sports. Football, he pointed out, had a better chance of creating community solidarity than academic achievements, which were too individualized and specialized to serve that purpose. Nor did Coleman credit how sports appealed to teenagers’ desire to differentiate themselves from their parents through physical success that their parents could no longer achieve. For all that, there was plenty of evidence to indicate that the kids were alright. A majority of Coleman’s respondents indicated that they preferred the parent-approved Pat Boone over Elvis Presley by a wide margin and claimed that they would rather risk breaking with a friend than earning their parents’ disapproval.⁠[^26]
If Coleman gave scholarly support to the peer pressure explanation for teenagers, psychiatrist Frederic Wertham played a similar role in his critique of commercial culture. has achieved notoriety among later generations for its extremism. Had Wertham not written his scathing attack on comic books, _The Seduction of the Innocent_, he would have been remembered, if remembered at all, as a committed social democratic who established a well-known clinic in Harlem named for Karl Marx’s son-in-law, the only psychiatrist willing to testify on Ethel Rosenberg’s behalf, a writer whose study of psychopathic murder attracted the enthusiastic attention of Thomas Mann and Arthur Miller, and forensic defender of Frank Santana, a Puerto Rican gang member who killed a rival, Billy Blankenship, in a street fight, a case that formed the immediate inspiration for _West Side Story_.[^27] His reputation, however, rests on his sensational expose of the damage done by gruesome comic books. Having noticed that the young criminals he treated read comics avidly, he was surprised to find that they were not funny but filled with sadomasochistic and sexualized images that glorified violence.  Immersed in the contemporary psychosocial interpretation of fascism, Wertham insisted that comics exploited the lack of ego strength of their readers and prompted the creation of a self prone to manipulation by authority. So Superman’s S linked him to the SS because of the fascist ubermensch fantasies at play. A little more plausibly he located latent homoerotic tendencies in the Batman and Robin stories. Driven by the profit motive, comic-book entrepreneurs were so little concern with their product that a twelve-year old could answer the age-old question of what he wanted to be with “a sex maniac.” Wertham was probably not so gullible to think the comic would cause deviant interest or crime; he was, however, certain that they coarsened the sensibilities of even normal children. “Pouring sordid stories into the minds of children is not the same as pouring water over a duck’s back.⁠”[^28]  Accused later of advocating censorship, Wertham is perhaps better understood as engaged in the social democratic project of protecting vulnerable selves so that they might achieve normality, which is why C. Wright Mills praised the book as a “most commendable use of the professional mind in service of the public.”⁠[^29] 
Psychiatrist Marynia Farnham, co-author of the anti-feminist _Modern Woman: The Lost Sex_, provided centered explanation for the problem in _The Adolescent_ (1951). Adolescence was a struggle to establish a unique personality capable of self-reliance and self-direction but that effort was stymied by the tension between physical maturity and social impositions that restricted teenage sexual activity so as to limit pregnancies that teenagers could not financially support. As would Coleman a decade later, Farnham saw the timeout filled with psychological extravagances. Farnham might have advocated tearing down prohibitions and making birth control legal or rearranging work relations. Instead she preferred enforced restraint and more adult supervision. In part, this recommendation allowed her to excoriate women who have “deserted the home for the supposedly more   rewarding and exiting life of rivalry with men” and on parents who had not provided guidelines and believed that “youngsters can make all decisions for themselves and that uncurbed freedom is their right from birth on.”[^30] In the end, however, Farnham’s advice came down to generalities — parents needed to understand their youngsters’ personalities, demand greater responsibility from them, and not be afraid to exercise authority. 
Farnham was unusual among most professionals writing on adolescents in at least considering the female of the species. How to be a man in a changing world was said to be extraordinarily difficult; how to become a woman much less so. Boys’ aspirations and obstacles attracted finely honed attention; girls were relegated to women’s media. Commentators believed that the concerns of female adolescents were boys, popularity, and beauty, which they dismissed as frivolous or sheer consumerism. That such concerns might touch upon legitimate problems about relationships that women (and men) needed to resolve was rarely considered. Problems of work for women were not asked at all. In his introduction to his classic _Growing Up Absurd_, Paul Goodman insisted that women did not grow up absurd since they “will have children which is absolutely self-justifying, like any other natural or creative act.” Further, he went on in the introduction, the problems of teenage boys were “intensely interesting to women, for if the boys do not grow up to be men, where shall the women find men?”⁠[^31] 
Farnham and Coleman were representative of one response to the teenage problem. They favored what might be called a conformist strategy of creating disciplined ways of easing unruly adolescents into their adult responsibilities. Their understanding of self-reliance and self-direction occasioned little questioning of American middle-class ideals but rather created the means by which adolescents could reach maturity in the unknown and unpredictable that modernity presented them.  On the other hand, there were those who put more emphasis on teenagers achieving personal integration during the period, centering the self as it were. They rejected the position of school counselors and advice columnists that adolescence had a predetermined end and treat the struggles of the American young as indicative of a society that failed to cultivate avenues by which a mature self could form. The two sides differed less in the results they desired than in the emphasis, less in the hope for individual achievement of maturation than how it was achieved and what it meant for the self. Judged by Sixties standards of “do your own thing,” both groups demurred, albeit with differing degrees of sympathy. Judged on their own terms, the differences in the politics of adolescence were substantial.
The most prominent and influential midcentury exploration of adolescence, Erik Erikson’s _Childhood and Society_ (1950) fell into the latter camp. It simultaneously laid out a normal and expected developmental pattern and criticized American practices for stymieing meaningful independence. Erikson was born in 1902 in Frankfort, uncertain who was his father. He migrated in 1927 to Vienna in order to teach at a school designed for children whose parents were in treatment with Anna Freud.⁠[^32] At her urging, he enrolled at the Vienna Psychoanalytic Institute, where he received his diploma in 1933. Harassed by the Nazis, he and his wife, Joan, set sail for the United States that same year. He used his contacts with anthropologists with a culture and personality bent — Edward Sapir, Margaret Mead, Alfred Kroeber, and Ruth Benedict —to observe the Sioux and the Yoruk. The effect could be seen in _Childhood and Society_’s emphasis on the culture-bound nature of personality development. Critical of efforts to enforce conformity by edict, he left the University of California in the early 1950s in protest of the requirement that faculty sign loyalty oaths. 
_Childhood and Society_ laid out a set of eight stages of life, each of which linked biological development to what Erikson termed a psychosocial crisis. As individuals attempt to master bodily functions or life tasks under the terms that a culture lays out for them, they encounter a set of conflicts that raise existential questions. So the initial stage of life in which the infant struggles with oral mastery and negotiates between inside and outside is rooted in the relationship with the mother and raises the question of trust. Subsequent stages involve bowel control or exploration and tool use and open up issues of autonomy, initiative and guilt. Erikson’s sequence is cumulative with each stage building on previous ones. Successful negotiation of the crisis of each stage yields rewards or “virtues.” A child who negotiates the trust - mistrust psychosocial challenge will emerge with hope. Passing through the second stage with a sense of autonomy rather than shame or doubt would, for instance, bestow the virtue of will. Although Erikson posed one pole of the challenge as the optimal or desirable force, he was well aware that both were needed for healthy living. Some mistrust of others is surely warranted as is retaining some reserves of shame and doubt. Those who could not balance psychosocial forces or interact with the outside in productive ways could, Erikson maintained, pass on to the next stage but the residue of the unsuccessful challenge would reassert itself in problems in later life.⁠[^33]
Where Freudians saw personality formed by the conflicts between nature and social demands in the early years of life from which individuals develop a characteristic repertoire of psychic responses, Erikson treated each stage as important in its own right. Working from the position that the ego had its own claims and was not necessarily at the mercy of the more powerful id and superego, Erikson contended that adolescence was not simply a consequence of Oedipal struggles but an important component of an ongoing process. Indeed, given Erikson’s insistence that identity was necessary to the feeling of being alive, one might conclude that the four prior stages led up to the crucial work of adolescence and the three subsequent ones expressed and expanded the identity that developed in adolescence. Adolescence, as Erikson portrayed it, coincided with puberty  and extended to roughly nineteen. It was the time that individuals confronted the tension between Identity and Role Confusion. Adolescents had to resolve the question of who they were and what they could be, despite their heightened concern about how they appear to others. The stage is initially confusing since adolescents have to link memories of past selves with anticipations of future ones while taking full measure of new physical and mental powers on the one hand and social expectations on the other. If the task is frustrated, anti-social and destructive behavior might well be the result. As complicated as the stage can be — something to which an increasing number of parents could attest — most adolescents  find an identity. Crucial to success is parental allowance for experimentation. Those who do open up space for a “moratorium” will generally find that their children have developed a full-blown identity in which they have reestablished boundaries and learned to negotiate with a sometimes hostile world. 
Although adolescence took place during a specific point in the life cycle and entailed finding identity, Erikson insisted that the content of adolescence was by no means universal. Based on his observations of the Sioux, the Yurok, the Germans, and the Americans, Erikson concluded that adolescence was  less a destination than a way of constituting and reconstituting fragmentary selves. The components of adolescence and the preferable outcomes of the stage’s psychosocial conflict could not be settled by an appeal to nature. In fact, Erikson maintained, the very purpose of identity was to help individuals adapt to historical change. Where Freudians saw individuals perpetually caught between biology and society and at odds with themselves, Erikson could imagine a number of reasonably successful resolutions of identity crises. 
Erikson did think adolescence would always be more or less tumultuous and change in the personality of the adolescent would be slow in coming. Still, adolescence need not, he maintained, be as severe and disorienting as it is in the United States. American social conditions left far too many adolescents ill equipped to be adults. Like many Europeans, he was struck by the American belief that individuals could start from scratch and reinvent themselves with no reference to past conditions or events. Determined to be unique, but lacking long-standing and meaningful institutions to guide the transitions (especially since rapid American social change renders existing ones ineffective) and eager to prepare themselves for success in the machine age (which, in Erikson’s view, entailed submission to the logic of systems), Americans ironically end up followers, molding themselves into what is available. The upshot, according to Erikson, was that U. S. teenagers were particularly susceptible to being “overadjusted,” pushed to conformity and premature resolution of the psychosocial crisis by excessive social pressure, which he often referred to as “a social jungle of human existence.” The culprit, Erikson charged, was “Mom” (punctuation in the original), a composite, stereotypical entity who managed her children’s lives, laying down rigid moral and behavior supposedly designed to help her children become independent. Instead, such parenting had the effect of making teens feel abandoned at one level and guilty of abandoning their mothers at another.⁠[^34]
Edgar Z. Friedenberg’s 1959 extension of Erikson, _The Vanishing Adolescent_, was less worried about maturation than the freedom to experiment itself.[^35] Where Coleman saw adolescence as self-contained, impervious to the outside world, Friedenberg discerned adult control channeling teenagers into socially acceptable ends, with the result that adolescence was not carrying out its proper role. Unlike simple societies and lower-class subcultures, intricate social organizations require an extended testing process so people can master roles. Freidenberg insisted that only by setting one’s self against the social order can an individual develop stable, clear ego identity that enables him to realize “the complex, subtle, and precious difference between himself and his environment” (13). The _sturm und drang_ of the stage may be extended, but it need not escalate in a war. The ideal resolution, Friedenberg asserted, was a profound sense of self; teenagers needed to act like aristocrats, not exactly imperious but self-assured (10).⁠
American society, Friedenberg maintained, was dedicated to defusing the clash, which is one reason he expressed a fondness for British schools, which gave “adolescents something to be adolescent about” (5).⁠ Instead of tests in a relatively protected environment, American adolescents were handed a pre-packaged, ready-made adult-in-training kit in which one got the appearance of adulthood with none of the difficulties. Institutions intended for adolescents treated discord and disagreement as socially disintegrative. Such institutions pointed to adult fears and anxieties rather than to any dangers posed to the young. If the disagreement was allowed to unfold properly, Friedenberg asserted, it would actually strengthen society by producing individuals who were truly authentic and capable of deeply felt relationships to other individuals. 
Although ostensibly a criticism of the American high school, the book drew on few direct observations of schools themselves. Friedenberg’s target was rather a culture that insisted on uniformity. As such, success in American life depended upon on defusing tensions and satisfying others rather than oneself. In valuing unity, American culture disparaged dissent and led people to avoid risking their future chances. Friedenberg charged other-directed America prevented individuals from distinguishing themselves from their environment, a tendency exacerbated by a consumerism in which ready-made goods substituted for development of competencies. The space in which teenagers could develop a strong sense of self shrunk accordingly. Friedenberg did not think adolescents would disappear entirely. Exceptional kids would remain. He chronicled five of them in the book. But for most, the outlook for independence and authenticity was growing dimmer.
Paul Goodman’s _Growing Up Absurd_ , a book often grouped with _The Vanishing Adolescent_, did not envision Friendenberg-like walling off from society. Instead the anarchist and Gestalt therapist Goodman saw the possibility of re-creating society on a human scale, the inverse of the rigid and dehumanizing American society. It failed to provide meaningful work with its “old-fashioned” personal virtues of honesty, independence and caring. Schools, in Goodman’s view, were factories of impulse suppression, not sites of creativity. Goodman was particularly attuned to the denial of sexuality. Goodman’s Gestalt commitments led him to advocate a self that expanded its boundaries, probing the division between itself and society. No youth institution reliably allowed for that activity. Because they grew up without the ability to mold the world to their liking, the humanity of American young men was stifled. Without a remaking of the world of work and love, socialization into adulthood was mere adjustment and perpetual ego deficit.Yet Goodman hardly celebrated role confusion. Those who resisted adjustment were, by his reckoning, either resigned (the beats) or fatalistic (delinquents). Ending absurdity required finishing what he called “the missed revolutions of modern times,” which would enable the young to strike the “right balance.”
Like Erikson, Friedenberg and Goodman, Washington University anthropologist Jules Henry lamented the inability of America society to provide institutions that allowed for independent selves. The adolescence sections of his _Culture Against Man _(1963), based on his observations of St. Louis area high schools, revealed how the essence of the teen years was insecurity. More than any other analyst, Henry captured the silent terror of adolescence. Writing with a socially aware Freudianism and a serious commitment to the well being of teenage girls, Henry attributed much difficulty to the constant mobility of American life and the general fickleness of Id-Creatures seeking immediate pleasure. Friendships were therefore quite unstable, and leading to an inadequacy felt on the prom dance floor and automobile backseats. Parental shortcomings lay less, a la Farnham, in the absence of parental disciple than in parental failure to establish and live out meaningful lives. This inability of adults to provide ego ideals, Henry argued, created a void that peers filled. Girls were especially affected in adolescence. The difficulty lay not so much in limited goals since beauty, fashion, and popularity struck him as being quite capable of generating a meaningful and creative femininity but that adults paradoxically goaded girls into sexual competition to snare the right husband but condemned those who slipped out of line.⁠[^36]
Henry located another consequence of the lack of ego ideals in the aversion of teenagers to work. The example of “hard-working daddies” who are “little at home and burdened with the irritations, coronaries, and ulcers of their work” only underwrote pleasure-seeking behavior. Schools, too, were inadequate in setting meaningful ideals. School work was generally unchallenging and meaningless, and even the boy or girl who did take school seriously found him or herself faced with other demands from friends, the opposite sex, and family. Studying, especially when nagged to do so by parents, made Henry’s informants feel at the will of others. Promise of future benefits from school work only compounded the feeling. Yet because adolescents neither developed their own standards of success or were involved in institutions in which the standards were meaningful to their talents or aspirations, grades loomed large in their education and work life. Unconnected to developing needs, grading accustomed students to accept impersonal, standardized norms as natural measure of oneself. This complex bequeathed a feeling of inadequacy to the majority.  Nor did pleasure seeking yield long-term ends and augured poorly for most emerging from the moratorium of adolescence with a coherent and rounded personality. 
Social scientists and critics were not the only groups fascinated with the problem of adolescents; novelists and film makers were also. The era was filled with numerous works, some of which have continued to appeal to readers and viewers. No single position unites such novels _The Adventures of Augie March_, _Catcher in the Rye_, _The Bell Jar_, _Goodbye, Columbus_, _On the Road_, _To Kill a Mockingbird_, _A Separate Peace_, and _Rabbit Run_ or films _Rebel Without A Cause_, _The Wild One_, _The Blackboard Jungle_, _I Was a Teenage Werewolf_, and _Splendor in the Grass_, save their evocation of a universe in which teens and young adults are not at home. Some were designed to provide material for a now significant segment of popular audience, teens themselves. Others were vehicles to imagine harmonious reconciliation. Others still made teenagers the epitome of the wide problem of loneliness and alienation or commentators on the lack of integrity in adult lives. 
Although the postwar artwork shared with earlier coming-of-age stories the conventions of a confused and unsettled protagonist and a distant and seemingly implacable social order, the novels and films of the mid-twentieth century departed from the models of the classic _bildungsroman_ and _kunstlerroman_. Those were novels of formation and growth of self. Narrated in the third person, connoting the objective truth of the situation, classic youth novels ended with the protagonists wiser and more understanding than when they began, their skills in negotiating the vicissitudes of life enhanced. Where they had begun their journey set against a society that seemingly had no place for them, they usually ended with a better sense of where they fit in and who they were. Their hard-won maturity enabled them to avoid repeating the mistakes of youth. Even when the youthful protagonist dies — the result of an unresolvable conflict often entailing unrequited love, the upshot is a lesson about how things are with the world. Of the novels, films, and plays of adolescent crisis that were popular among subsequent generations (or at least teachers of subsequent generations), perhaps only John Knowles’s _Separate Peace_ (1959) harkened back to nineteenth-century traditions of character formation.
Much of the significant postwar artwork centered around adolescents, on the other hand, lacked the same confident teleology. Written in the first person or shot with a subjective camera, midcentury novels and films were statements of feeling, perceptions, and partial understandings of the narrator. As titles such as _On the Road_ and _Rabbit Run_ indicate, movement, not arrival, is the major emphasis of the novel and the crucial condition of the protagonists. Many central figures ranging from Holden Caulfield to David of James Baldwin’s Giovanni’s Room fail to develop an ego identity or even to articulate what maturity would look like. Even those whose lives are not particularly angst-ridden, like Bellow’s _Augie March_, are noteworthy for their unsettled nature and their formless selves. March’s picaresque tale — which features escapades that span Chicago poolrooms, Mexican deserts, and service in the Merchant Marine —like his unformed self, lacks a destination or goal. Throughout these works, the identity crisis functioned as part rejection of conventional social norms and roles and part claim to distinctively authentic existence. Maturity rarely emerges as a solution to the adolescents’ condition. Instead, many advanced a fantasy of a permanent adolescence in which adult behavioral norms are never embraced. Permanent adolescence conferred a special status as honest, even if he or she did not often tell the truth, or a dissident, even if he or she rallied around no principles save a generalized resistance.⁠[^37]
Nicholas Ray’s _Rebel Without a Cause_ (1955), the story of twenty-four hours in the life of troubled teenager Jim Stark, envisioned teen angst as a reaction to the failure of adults to show meaningful concern for their children or provide appropriate gender roles. Known  for James Dean’s star turn in which he combined daring, anger, pain, and an expressive adolescent inarticulateness, the movie often seemed like Farnham in technicolor. Stark’s brushes with the law and his marked inability to make friends at other schools have led the family to move to Los Angeles. At the heart of his troubles is the gender trouble all around him. His cold and demanding mother clearly dominates his father, who backs down in nearly every argument rather than live with unpleasantness. The point is driven home in the scene in which he wears an apron (and Ray makes it a particularly frilly full-length one, which the father (Jim Backus) wears over his suit) while doing chores around the house. Throughout, Jim asks his father what do you have to do to be a man, a question his father does not, and apparently can not, answer. The lack of guidance leads Jim to complain to the earnest arresting officer that his father wants to be his pal and wishes that his dad would haul off and hit his mother just once and set things straight. No one, he concludes, could grow up in a circus like that. His parents’ mixed messages, he howls after being brought to jail for public drunkenness, are tearing him apart. 
The subsequent day at school goes no better, as he becomes ensnared in a fight with the school bully, Buzz. The clash escalates over the course of the evening in a “chickie run,” a race in two stolen cars towards a cliff that is won by being the last to jump out, in which Buzz dies. His attempt to tell his parents what happened is a festival of miscommunication. Efforts to report the incident to the police backfire and in the course of a tumultuous evening Jim joins with the equally troubled Judy (Natalie Wood — whose efforts to kiss her father are greeted with pushes and slaps) and Plato (Sal Mineo — whose father abandoned the family) in an abandoned mansion to play fantasy family with the quite traditional roles. As Buzz’s gang breaks up the game, fighting escalates and eventually Plato, who is extraordinarily agitated and has been brandishing his mother’s pistol, is shot by the police while wearing Jim’s trademark red jacket, which lead the Starks, brought to the scene by the police, to believe initially he was shot. They soon see Jim weeping over Plato’s death, prompting his father to comfort him and to vow to be a better parent. The possibility that Jim may indeed grow up is hinted at when he introduces Judy to his family. 
Holden Caulfied, the archetypal protagonist of _Catcher in the Rye_, seems less likely to resolve his adolescent crisis and form a genuine adult self. In his moral insistence and emotional vulnerability, Holden exemplifies the traits that made teenagers both fascinating and exasperating. He is prone to maudlin displays of concern and tremendous remorse — apparent in his trek through Central Park to find where the ducks go in winter and his subsequent breaking the record bought for his sister Phoebe, indifferent to school and achievement and drawn to such unrealistic plans as living in the wilderness. Although superficially aware of adult practices (drinking in night clubs, going to Broadway plays, staying alone in a hotel), Holden is nonetheless uncomfortable with adult status. He is sexually inexperienced (part of the narrative entails his failed efforts to lose his virginity and his anger at roommates who are cavalier in their relations with women). In addition, he envisions sexuality as an unwarranted aggression on the innocence and generosity of children. He recoils at obscene graffiti on the merry - go- round and imagines himself as protector of the purity of children, wanting to be the guardian of children playing an unspecified game in a rye field on the edge of a cliff. Rejecting that advice of a former teacher that an immature man wishes to die of a noble cause while a mature one hopes to live humbly for one, he embraces the stasis of the Eskimos in the diorama at the Natural History museum, wishing that he too could stay the same. 
Holden’s indictment of adulthood is among the best known parts of the book. Almost everyone who has read it — whether he or she admires him for his truth telling or recoils from his whininess — remembers his tendency to label others (and at times himself) as phony. The phrase became part of the lexicon of midcentury because it pithily encapsulated the postwar concern with authenticity and the representative role of adolescents in feeling their way toward it. Phonies cheat at the Eriksonian task of balancing expression of self with social involvement. They adopt socially acceptable behavior not from essential commitment but for material and personal gain. Their concern for others derives from their sense that such gestures are social expected. Holden applies the word seemingly indiscriminately, grouping his roommate Stradlater who takes advantage of girls and the headmaster who insincerely greets odd-looking parents with patrons who cheer wildly for false, inauthentic things such as the Rockettes’ precision dancing, Lunt-Fontaine performances, or the nightclub pianist Ernie’s predictable flourishes on the other. Adults might well judge the insincerity in dealing with others a more serious (if sometimes necessary) offense than bad taste. In Holden’s world, however, both groups are equally products of a social world of artifice and manipulation in which spontaneity, real joy, kindness, and wholeness are absent. Holden, in contrast, champions a world of authenticity in which people acted as they really were.⁠[^38]
As committed as he is to authenticity, Holden is still very much a vulnerable adolescent. Protecting his faint sense of who he really is often leads him into actions that are themselves phony. As he himself admits, he is the “the most terrific liar you ever saw.” Indeed he dissembles constantly. Some lies are designed to conform to social norms as when he tells the mother of the “biggest bastard that ever went to Pency” that her son is both popular and modest because he thinks she is nice and does not want to puncture her illusions. Other lies are cruel as when he punishes the shallow women from Seattle by telling them that they just missed seeing the actor Gary Cooper. Still other falsehoods deflect attention away from Holden’s actual situation. Personal communication is fraught for Holden because it risks bringing up painful memories of his brother Allie’s death and exacerbating his uneasiness with himself. It is also fraught because Holden posses enough self awareness to realize his own propensity for phoniness. Locked in the dilemma, all he can imagine is going West and living as a deaf mute. Alienation, normally an obstacle to coming to terms with oneself and one’s feelings, is here the guarantor of authenticity and the protector of identity against both change and social expectations. The enduring popularity of the novel among adults speaks to the desire to step out of adult roles and remove oneself from adulthood, which is why some talk of adolescence as an kind of ethnicity.[^39]
Critics have touted Sylvia Plath’s Bell Jar (1963) as the female version of Catcher and the similarities are clear.⁠[^40] Esther Greenwood, the protagonist of the novel, shares with Holden Caulfield a profound alienation from the adult world and from herself. Like him, she judges others as inauthentic and like him, she has no sense of what she wants to be. The publication history of both books were parallel. Both were turned down by the publishers that originally commissioned their work with Salinger’s editor telling him that he could not tell if Holden was supposed to be crazy or not and Plath’s labeling hers “disappointing, juvenile, and overwrought.” Both authors were thought to identify with their lead characters. Although famously a recluse, Salinger did try to peddle a stage version with the provision that he play Holden. Plath drew many of the details from her own life and committed suicide shortly after the British publication. 
Yet the social world that Esther finds so oppressive is only partially the one that Holden believes is filled with phonies. The inauthenticity that Plath details takes on a special complexion because it is women’s roles that Esther finds particularly oppressive. Winner of a prestigious summer internship at a New York woman’s magazine, _Ladies Day_, Esther is unmoved by what other girls would have regarded as a dream chance, feeling only “still and empty’ (2). Unlike her fellow interns, she rejects traditional goals. When asked what she wants to be, she can only manage that she doesn’t know. Female identity as conventionally advanced repels her, provoking horrifying images. She compares marriage and children rearing to being “brainwashed” in which “you went about numb as a slave in some private totalitarian state” (81). Childbirth is akin to being trapped in a “long, blind, doorless and windowless corridor of pain” (p. 62). The double standard infuriates her and she labels her boy friend Buddy a “hypocrite” when he admits he is not a virgin and breaks off their engagement. Losing her virginity to a tall but not very good looking mathematician in Cambridge leads to hemorrhaging and a trip to the hospital. In short, she regards the female existence as being under a bell jar — an image she uses to describe her own empty, airless, suspended experience but applies later to the college girls who played bridge, gossip, and studied (227). That application has a double edge — both setting Esther apart (her distinctiveness lies in her ability to see the bell jar) and establishing possible similarities with others. 
Her lack of traditional feminine desires prompts her to undertake an unsuccessful search for meaning. Her quest to be a writer comes to naught when she is rejected for a summer class at Harvard taught by a famous writer. Finding nothing satisfying, she veers toward madness that liberates her from the social imperatives imposed upon middle-class women. It also runs the risk of obliterating the internal self altogether. Where Holden aspires to be isolated or in a perpetual adolescent state, Esther struggles to be able to say I am. At times she feels a zombie inside her, preventing her from speaking or writing, convinced that her deteriorating penmanship is the sign of insanity that she needs to hide from her doctor. Her suicide attempts fail by her account because her body will not obey her mind. Where traditionally the mind (or head) has been regarded as the scene of the self, Esther experiences what Abigail Cheever has called “a profound disintegration” in which her body and her mind are not working in tandem; her rationality gone, her existence is affirmed by the acts of her body. Contending that it has “little tricks,” she sets as her goal escaping being “trapped in its stupid cage for fifty years” left “without any sense at all” (153).
As her disintegration worsens, she enters treatment with an arrogant, self-absorbed and unfeeling male psychiatrist. He freely uses electroshock therapy, which Esther experiences as hellish torture. Walking out rather than go through with more of the same, she continues her efforts at suicide. Eventually she comes close enough to succeeding by taking fifty sleeping pills at once and hiding in her cellar, which results in her confinement in a private hospital. There, after a successful electroshock treatment and an empathetic therapy with a female doctor, she  finally comes to a tenuous and fragile grip on normality, being able to say at a funeral of a friend who successfully committed suicide, “I am, I am, I am.” which she ascribes to “the old brag of my heart.” Where her mother insists she treat her illness as if it were a bad dream, she counters to herself that she can not since is was part of her. By retaining a sense of her madness, Esther emphasizes her distance from social roles, even as she gets ready to be released into the social world and lead what others might term a normal existence. Yet the content of her character remains sketchy at best. Nor is it certain that she will not try suicide again. As such, Esther Greenwood serves as a stark example of how fragile growing up could be.⁠

￼ 

[^1]:	Joseph F. Kett, _Rites of Passage: Adolescence in America 1790 to the Present _(New York: Basic Books, 1977).

[^2]:	Hall, quoted in {Hine, 1999, #82013@160}

[^3]:	“School boys point up a US weakness,” _Life Magazine_ (March 24, 1958), 26-35.

[^4]:	{Gilbert, 1986, #4497} is the most thorough study of the problem of delinquency in the 1950s.

[^5]:	{Coleman, 1961, #52905}

[^6]:	{Berger, Spring, #20610} Whether these were answers that reflected actual preferences or what the respondents thought Coleman expected is another matter.

[^7]:	Details of Wertham’s life come from James Reibman’s 2004 preface to {Wertham, 2004, #70682}

[^8]:	Wertham, 59.

[^9]:	C. Wright Mills, “Nothing to Laugh At,” _New York Times_April 25, 1954, pg BR 20.

[^10]:	{Farnham, 1951, #55378@211, 221}

[^11]:	{Goodman, 2012, #90180}

[^12]:	Details of Erikson’s life and work are from {Friedman, 1999, #24203}

[^13]:	{Erikson, 1950, #94711@219-35}

[^14]:	Erikson’s discussion draws on Phillip Wylie’s more virulent _Generation of Vipers_ (1943) which coined the derogatory “Momism.” For an insightful discussion of the book and the intellectual climate, see {Plant, 2010, #88295}

[^15]:	Edgar Z. Friedenberg, _The Vanishing Adolescent_ (Boston: Beacon Press, 1959).

[^16]:	Jules Henry, _Culture Against Man_ (New York: Random House, 1963), 147-282, especially 170-180.

[^17]:	Morris Dickstein, _Leopards in the Temple: The Transformation of American Fiction, 1945-1970_ (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002), 10 and Thomas H. Schaub, _American Fiction in the Cold War_ (Madison, Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press, 1991), 79-82.

[^18]:	The contrast between inner self and outer role is one constantly negotiated and renegotiated in the postwar period and is prominent in Erikson’s last four stages and, in another register, Erving Goffman’s work, particularly Erving Goffman, _The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life_ (Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh, Social Sciences Research Centre, 1956).

[^19]:	The literature on _Catcher _and _Bell Jar_ is voluminous and can be found in the annotated bibliography. I have drawn especially on Louis Menand, “Holden At Fifty: “”The Catcher in the Rye’ and What it Spawned,” _The New Yorker_ (October 1, 2001): 82-87 and Abigail Cheever, _Real Phonies: Cultures of Authenticity in Post-World War II America_ (Athens, Ga.: University of Georgia Press, 2010), Chapters One and Two and for _Bell Jar_ Kate Baldwin, “The Radical Imaginary of The Bell Jar” _Novel: A Forum on Fiction_ 38.1 (Fall 2004): 21-40, and Maria Farland, “Sylvia Plath’s Anti-Psychiatry” _Minnesota Review_ 55-57 (2002): 245-256.

[^20]:	See both Frances McCullough’s Forward and Lois Ames’ Biographical Note to the 1999 Perennial-HarperCollins edition and Menand, 86.

[^21]:	Joseph F. Kett, _Rites of Passage: Adolescence in America 1790 to the Present _(New York: Basic Books, 1977).

[^22]:	Hall, quoted in {Hine, 1999, #82013@160}

[^23]:	“School boys point up a US weakness,” _Life Magazine_ (March 24, 1958), 26-35.

[^24]:	{Gilbert, 1986, #4497} is the most thorough study of the problem of delinquency in the 1950s.

[^25]:	{Coleman, 1961, #52905}

[^26]:	{Berger, Spring, #20610} Whether these were answers that reflected actual preferences or what the respondents thought Coleman expected is another matter.

[^27]:	Details of Wertham’s life come from James Reibman’s 2004 preface to {Wertham, 2004, #70682}

[^28]:	Wertham, 59.

[^29]:	C. Wright Mills, “Nothing to Laugh At,” _New York Times_April 25, 1954, pg BR 20.

[^30]:	{Farnham, 1951, #55378@211, 221}

[^31]:	{Goodman, 2012, #90180}

[^32]:	Details of Erikson’s life and work are from {Friedman, 1999, #24203}

[^33]:	{Erikson, 1950, #94711@219-35}

[^34]:	Erikson’s discussion draws on Phillip Wylie’s more virulent _Generation of Vipers_ (1943) which coined the derogatory “Momism.” For an insightful discussion of the book and the intellectual climate, see {Plant, 2010, #88295}

[^35]:	Edgar Z. Friedenberg, _The Vanishing Adolescent_ (Boston: Beacon Press, 1959).

[^36]:	Jules Henry, _Culture Against Man_ (New York: Random House, 1963), 147-282, especially 170-180.

[^37]:	Morris Dickstein, _Leopards in the Temple: The Transformation of American Fiction, 1945-1970_ (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002), 10 and Thomas H. Schaub, _American Fiction in the Cold War_ (Madison, Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press, 1991), 79-82.

[^38]:	The contrast between inner self and outer role is one constantly negotiated and renegotiated in the postwar period and is prominent in Erikson’s last four stages and, in another register, Erving Goffman’s work, particularly Erving Goffman, _The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life_ (Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh, Social Sciences Research Centre, 1956).

[^39]:	The literature on _Catcher _and _Bell Jar_ is voluminous and can be found in the annotated bibliography. I have drawn especially on Louis Menand, “Holden At Fifty: “”The Catcher in the Rye’ and What it Spawned,” _The New Yorker_ (October 1, 2001): 82-87 and Abigail Cheever, _Real Phonies: Cultures of Authenticity in Post-World War II America_ (Athens, Ga.: University of Georgia Press, 2010), Chapters One and Two and for _Bell Jar_ Kate Baldwin, “The Radical Imaginary of The Bell Jar” _Novel: A Forum on Fiction_ 38.1 (Fall 2004): 21-40, and Maria Farland, “Sylvia Plath’s Anti-Psychiatry” _Minnesota Review_ 55-57 (2002): 245-256.

[^40]:	See both Frances McCullough’s Forward and Lois Ames’ Biographical Note to the 1999 Perennial-HarperCollins edition and Menand, 86.