Revivals

 While some of the intellectual and cultural landmarks at the end of the midcentury period appeared as culminations of brewing ideas and creative ventures, others might be regarded as returns or revivals of impulses left behind at the start of those years.  Eleanor Flexner’s Century of Struggle, the first comprehensive history of the women’s suffrage movement, in 1959 and Betty Friedan’s Feminine Mystique in 1963 each in its own way represented the recovery of stirrings in women’s rights dating to the 1940s.  Likewise, a tentative revival in residual Popular Front sensibilities cropped up in the late 1950s, even as the Communist Party USA broke apart in the wake of Nikita Khrushchev’s 1956 denunciation of Stalin.  The actor, concert singer, and left-wing civil rights activist Paul Robeson, who had been blacklisted for his pro-Communist views since 1950, appeared at Carnegie Hall in a comeback concert in May 1959.  A younger member of the left-wing black arts milieu in Harlem, Harry Belafonte, had broken out of Red Scare constraints with a smash hit album of Calypso songs in 1956.  Belafonte gave two Carnegie Hall concerts in April 1959 that reprised, in a more “pop” style, Robeson’s wide-ranging performances featuring African-American, Caribbean, Jewish, and other international folk songs—a kind of left-wing multiculturalism avant la lettre.
Less oriented to the formal concert hall performance than Belafonte and his forerunner Robeson but intersecting with their repertoire and its political overtones, the musical movement that came to be called the “folk revival” followed a similar pattern:  decline in the early Cold War years and recovery toward the end of the 1950s.  Having roots in the work of song collectors back in the 1890s, festivals of regional culture in the 1920s, and recording companies scouring the countryside on the eve of the Depression, “folk music” became associated with the Popular Front as young musicians such as Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger wrote lyrics of protest and struggle set to old or newly invented melodies, performed at union-organizing and anti-fascist rallies.  Combined with masters of “country” blues such as the team Sonny Terry and Brownie McGhee or singer-songwriter Lead Belly, folk music in the late 1930s achieved some prominence at the racially inclusive, left-wing cabaret, Café Society, in New York.  By the late 1940s, while still carrying its political coloring, folk musicians had entered the field of popular music.  Most notably, the singing group the Weavers, featuring Seeger, Lee Hays, Fred Hellerman, and Ronnie Gilbert, had a hit record in 1950 with Lead Belly’s song, “Goodnight, Irene,” but the Red Scare blacklist shut down their access to radio shows and concert halls by 1952.
The association with suppressed dissent as well as its aura of simplicity—signaled by its key instruments banjo, guitar, acoustic bass, and harmonica—folk music lived on through the 1950s in the vein of a bohemian underground.  An eccentric collector named Harry Smith, devoted equally to breaking the color line and exploring esoteric mystical doctrines, compiled a 6-record Anthology of American Folk Music on the basis of nearly forgotten pre-Depression platters of “race” and “hillbilly” songs issued in 1952.  It would become the “Bible of the folk revival,” a reservoir of hidden knowledge for young enthusiasts such as Ramblin’ Jack Elliott, Dave Van Ronk, and later Joan Baez and Bob Dylan.  The sounds had rung through children’s summer camps (especially those with a left-wing heritage) and low-key college-town venues (“coffeehouses”) in places like the “Dinkytown” neighborhood of Minneapolis. Due to its growing audience, the founder of the Newport Jazz Festival added the Newport Folk Festival in 1959.  And while the early pop stars of folk music such as the Kingston Trio (from 1957) and Peter, Paul and Mary (from 1961) gave a white veneer to the genre, the revival had always had a cross-racial character, as figures such as the Odetta, who had begun folk-singing career in San Francisco’s basement nightclub, the hungry I, which also birthed much of the new stand-up, political satire.  She recorded “Odetta Sings Ballads and Blues” in 1957 and would go on to identify with the dawning civil rights movement and its “freedom songs.”
In the early 1960s, folk music burgeoned in the clubs of Greenwich Village and on college campuses, characterized by “the kind of self-expression of a quality music,” New York Times writer Robert Shelton said, “that was home-crafted, homemade, self-developed, free, radical.” Ostensibly stripped of big business glitz and heavy-handed commercial promotion, folk music cultivated audiences accustomed to dress down, dance barefoot, and sing along in what felt like new-found communities.  Although initially stirred by early rock ‘n’ roll and an exceedingly ambitious musician, Bob Dylan cultivated a “low folk” rough and rude manner of presentation, as well as adopting his hero Woody Guthrie’s use of the medium for political expression.  He recorded fierce “protest” songs, though he later rejected that characterization as he embraced an alternative style of Beat poetry took the helm of his writing; the two modes combined in “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall” in 1963, rumored to have been provoked by the Cuban Missile Crisis (and seeming to refer to nuclear fallout) but defined by Dylan himself as a more general reaction to a culture of war, “of black days, of schism, evil for evil, the common destiny of the human being getting thrown off course.”
Another example of the revival pattern—of phenomena present in the late 1940s and early 1950s, subsiding or suppressed thereafter, dwelling in subterranean spaces, and starting to break the surface again by the end of our period—can be recognized in gay American life.  As Allan Bérubé summed it up in his pathbreaking book, Coming Out Under Fire, the mass mobilization of World War II and the single-sex environments it fostered nurtured homosexual relations among service men and women as the military’s pragmatic need to turn the blind eye competed with long-held prejudices and new modes of surveillance and repression.  That unresolved conflict led immediately after the war to both thousands of “blue” (a form of dishonorable) discharges issued to gay soldiers and the surprising willingness of many veterans to challenge them, especially because they endangered access to GI Bill benefits.  Because African American soldiers also suffered disproportionately from the “blue” card form of unjust discipline, black newspapers took up the cause of fighting the discharges, hence allying with a proto-gay rights campaign.  Here as in other cases, social justice movements stirred in the late 1940s but declined under the force of the Cold War and Red Scare by the early 1950s.  Government policy moved sharply toward more rigid exclusions: in what came to be called “the lavender scare,” a great many gays lost federal jobs due either to suspicions about their loyalty or their own desire to avoid inquiries into their private lives.  Meanwhile, as new venues of gay sociability grew in American cities—always under some threat of exposure or persecution—the cultural style known as “camp” steadily grew as means of playing with disguise, costume, self-presentation, and coded expressions of pain, pleasure and pathos.  Certain entertainments attracted special devotion in this vein due to the kinds of emotional, performative display they permitted, particularly opera (and charismatic divas), torch-singing, and the like.
By the late 1950s, Judy Garland, who had moved on from child stardom in The Wizard of Oz to build great popularity as a stage singer, first in vaudeville-like routines and later as an admired vocalist, had a growing audience of gay fans.  That appeal had diverse sources:  the enduring image from Oz of a child’s journey through a fantastic land full of mystery and danger, the lavish production of her stage appearances, the full-throated emotionality of her singing, knowledge of her suffering under the manipulation of movie agents, unhappy marriages, and drug and alcohol addictions.  Under all that pressure, Garland cracked and required a long hospital convalescence in the late 1950s.  She emerged as the new decade began, giving a comeback concert at Carnegie Hall on April 23, 1961, to rapturous acclaim by her devoted fans, the recording industry (the live show became a top-seller as a double-LP album), and music critics.  The event drew hundreds of her fan base among gay men, who rallied to cheer Garland on and share the passionate feeling of connection she created with her audience.  The scene represented an early move from the veiled sexual communities gays had built through the 1950s to a greater visibility in public life.  Garland’s comeback was a kind of collective coming out.
