Whitfield, Sex in the Fifties
Sex and the Single Decade
Stephen J. Whitfield
The 1950s constitute the belle e ́poque, especially for those who happened to have grown up white, male, and straight. No subsequent period has elicited such widespread nostalgia as the decade on which American graffiti (“I Like Ike,” I Love Lucy) were inscribed. Once dismissed—especially by militant liberals and by radicals—as homage to catatonia, the era that began with V-J Day and ended on 22 November 1963 has been cast in a sentimental afterglow. For well over a decade, Americans not only cherished stability but made it into a singular achievement; dissidence rarely percolated to the surface. The labor movement was tame, and as likely to be anti-Communist as was the cham- ber of commerce. As for those stigmatized by race or ethnicity, “the excluded group has the same notion of life and the same aspirations as the excluding group,” Lionel Trilling wrote in 1950, when every citizen wanted to join the team (qtd. in Corber 168). In the fall of 1956, both Martin Luther King, Jr. and Jack Ker- ouac voted for Dwight Eisenhower, who left mostly to its own devices an economy which had quickly exceeded pre-Depression levels and offered purchasing power which staggered the world. The inalienable pursuit of happiness was diffused as never before, and tragedy was no more intense than The Beach Boys’ defini- tion—when daddy takes your T-bird away.
The other 1950s was scarred by repression. Self-indulgence inspired demands for self-control—if need be, reinforced by the state. (As late as 1959, Gallup pollsters reported that one out of every three Protestants still favored Prohibition.) Social control left little breathing space for the cultivation of difference. In no other decade of the century, before or since, did religion enjoy such uncontested prestige; and for heaven’s sake the populace was expected to be locked into an upright position. Sex roles were supposed to be sharply circumscribed: men were men, and women were housewives. Modern feminism began, after all, in the family of the 1950s, with its accentuation of the virtues of domesticity (and the 1960s began with the divorce of Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz). The sexual revolution had barely been acti-
Homosexuality in Cold War America: Resistance and the Crisis of Masculinity
By Robert J. Corber Duke University Press, 1997
Dr. Strangelove’s America: Society and Culture in the Atomic Age
By Margot A. Henriksen University of California Press, 1997
Masked Men: Masculinity and the Movies in the Fifties
By Steven Cohan Indiana University Press, 1997
Mad to Be Saved: The Beats, the ’50s, and Film By David Sterritt Southern Illinois University Press, 1998
􏰀 2000 OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS AMERICAN LITERARY HISTORY
The difficulty of sustaining the orderly and commonplace life which [the 1950s] exalted now looks hidden in plain view. When prominent custodians of civic virtue included J. Edgar Hoover and Roy Cohn, neither of whom lived in or raised a family akin to the traditional ideal, a decade is ripe for satire, if not for denunciations of hypocrisy, and also for scholarship that explores the social tensions which finally could be neither ignored nor reconciled.
vated—much less accepted—in the 1950s, but would soon sweep through the nation so quickly that when Admiral Jeremiah Den- ton, a future senator from Alabama, returned from a POW camp in Vietnam, his wife had to explain to him what a massage par- lor was.
No wonder historians have understood the 1950s as sus- pended between two polarities. Rigidity would provoke recoil, and the excesses of homogeneity and authority would elicit irre- pressible yearnings for pleasure and freedom. Because the exi- gencies of conformism imposed so much strain, fissures, para- doxes, and subversion would be exposed in the following decade. Retrospective judgments therefore range across a spectrum. For every cultural historian who highlights the peculiar narrowness of the American Way of Life, another detects underground sig- nals which were emitted whenever the pressures of the Cold War became unbearable. The difficulty of sustaining the orderly and commonplace life which that decade exalted now looks hidden in plain view. When prominent custodians of civic virtue included J. Edgar Hoover and Roy Cohn, neither of whom lived in or raised a family akin to the traditional ideal, a decade is ripe for satire, if not for denunciations of hypocrisy, and also for scholar- ship that explores the social tensions which finally could be nei- ther ignored nor reconciled. Brandishing mostly literary and cin- ematic evidence, these four books are devoted to the historical problem raised by the 1950s, which is to show how destabilizing the hegemony of the squares proved to be.
The most ingenious and sophisticated of these volumes, Masked Men: Masculinity and the Movies in the Fifties reveals the fragility of the ideal of masculinity. Whether draped in a gray flannel suit or a torn T-shirt, the manhood projected on the 1950s screen contained too many oddities and inconsistencies to be credible. A number of resourceful and convincing strategies are adopted to advance Steven Cohan’s case that masculinity is merely performative and theatrical, a “masquerade” derived not from the imperatives of biology but instead from the demands of society. “What can you do when you have to be a man?” is the futile question Jim Stark (James Dean) poses to his father in Re- bel Without a Cause (1955). That Dean also starred as a troubled teenager in East of Eden (1955), in a role which Montgomery Clift had turned down, reinforces a claim of Robert J. Corber’s as well: “[M]asculinity was a site of intense ideological struggle throughout the postwar period” (145). What fascinates Cohan is gender (not sex), depicted in well over a dozen films, mostly set in the 1950s, such as A Place in the Sun (1951), The Seven Year Itch (1955), Picnic, (1955) and Pillow Talk (1959). He intends his
772
Sex and the Single Decade
title to suggest how “a normative masculinity functioned on screen to mask the social differences that stratified U.S. society during the fifties, while it recognizes, too, how films of this period highlight the multiple masquerades that constituted masculinity in its representation” (x).
The Cold War complicated the ideal of masculinity and made it “contradictory,” he writes, since men who had to be “hard” when defending their country against its Communist foes had to be “soft” in ensuring a warm, comfortable home life (xii)—and in cooperating closely with other organization men. The impediments to satisfying such divergent standards were re- corded in Look’s series on “The Decline of the American Male” (1958), whose sex life had been disclosed in Dr. Alfred Kinsey’s report exactly a decade earlier. While praising men for their feats of productivity, the weekly magazine warned of “the danger . . . that we will become too soft, too complacent and too home- oriented to meet the challenge of other dynamic nations like China and the Soviet Union” (qtd. in Cohan 6). Reassurance came on celluloid the following year in North by Northwest (1959), when a dapper advertising man, Roger O. Thornhill (Cary Grant), was enlisted in the Cold War against the effete East, personified by James Mason and Martin Landau. In show- ing how fictive was the construction of Grant’s character in the film, and in noting the discrepancy with his offscreen masculin- ity, Cohan’s critique in chapter 1 of “the spy in the gray flannel suit” is itself a bravura performance. Its blend of astute and witty analysis (often burnished with the savvy use of fan magazines and studio publicity) is matched in the rest of this dazzling book as well, down to Some Like It Hot (1959), a comedy which pushes to bittersweet limits the masquerade of masculinity. When Joe (Tony Curtis) switches from playing Josephine back to his own gender, he imitates a man imitating—who else but a charming studio concoction who was renamed Cary Grant?
Is manhood malleable enough to include the political? Can politics be redefined in terms of subjectivity, so that writers can themselves be the spearheads of social change? Affirmative an- swers are given in Homosexuality in Cold War America: Resis- tance and the Crisis of Masculinity, which shows how three writ- ers in particular “treated homosexuality as a subversive form of identity that had the potential to disrupt the system of represen- tation underpinning the Cold War consensus” (3). Corber be- lieves that Gore Vidal, Tennessee Williams, and James Baldwin helped convert homosexuality into “the basis for a political iden- tity” (2), “a form of oppositional consciousness” (4). In that era homosexuality itself—not homophobia—was the pejorative
American Literary History 773
774 Sex and the Single Decade
term in the lexicon of public life, and general knowledge of the “deviance” of gay writers did not exist. (Speculation may have been on many minds, but was on very few tongues.) So the resis- tance to cramped definitions of normality had to be subtle.
That is why Corber begins with film noir, “a potentially emancipatory form of mass culture” (9), because the hard-boiled hero is typically exempt from the cult of domesticity which was so pronounced by the end of the 1940s. Corber’s choices of Laura (1944) and Crossfire (1947) are nevertheless eccentric. In Otto Preminger’s film, the elegant Waldo Lydecker (Clifton Webb) makes such a spectacle of himself that he confirms the consumer- ism driving postwar prosperity; nor does RKO Pictures’ assault on bigotry feature either a homosexual or a hard-boiled detec- tive. Such cinematic examples fail to strengthen Corber’s claims, which pivot on making The City and the Pillar (1946), Cat on a Hot Tin Roof (1955) and Another Country (1962) into literary weapons aimed at “the binary oppositions that organized every- day life in Cold War America (white vs. black, straight vs. gay, male vs. female)” (104). Such dichotomies, however, are exactly what the consensus of the 1950s was designed to suppress, as Trilling had observed. Neither blacks nor gays nor females artic- ulated—or were understood to have—interests exclusive of the white heterosexual men whose hegemony was taken for granted. Confronting private relations and subjective states, the works which Corber analyzes do not defy the sense of political paralysis which is the signature of the 1950s. He finds it “unlikely that gay liberation would have emerged so quickly as a mass movement if Williams, Vidal, and Baldwin,” among others, had not contested “the discourses and institutions that naturalized the construction of gender and sexual identity” immediately after World War II (19). Yet Homosexuality in Cold War America presents no evi- dence to support such a conjecture.
Gender identities and sexual proclivities are compatible with any political position, and therefore David Sterritt looks elsewhere to find the seeds of the 1960s. The Beats are obvious candidates; they represented “a negative dialectic that sought to oppose conventionality, materialism, repressiveness, regimenta- tion, and corruption with the opposites of those qualities” (2). The Beats did not succeed in exorcising Moloch. But by emitting “currents of carnivalistic subversion” (6), they shook up the con- sensus. They mobilized no constituencies for serious reform— but did nick the consciousness of Hollywood, which is the sub- ject of Mad to Be Saved: The Beats, the ’50s, and Film. The Beats were made for cinematic treatment, since their titillating immod- eration was expressed in the spontaneity of the jazz they adored,
in the drugs that made them howling mad, in the racial bound- aries they dared to cross, and in the kinds of chicks they seemed to dig. Sterritt makes a heroic effort to track the cultural ex- changes between the moviemakers and the subterraneans, but concedes that film did not occupy “a specifically privileged role in the lives and works of most of the Beats” (10), whose alien- ation was too exotic and unfathomable.
He reports that the squares at Warner Brothers wanted to adapt On the Road (1957), with the author himself playing his alter ego, Sal Paradise. Instead Kerouac recommended Marlon Brando, who had triumphed three years earlier in On the Water- front (1954), in a role turned down by Montgomery Clift. But neither Brando nor the fast-talking, cigar-chomping producer Jerry Wald could get past the novelist’s prohibition of any adap- tations that included “cruelty” and violence (165), as befit a writer who cherished—perhaps above any other American movie—Fantasia (1940). Walt Disney’s film is only a little more unrealistic than Metro Goldwyn Mayer’s The Beat Generation (1959), which opens with that avatar of youthful rebellion, Louis Armstrong, singing in a coffeehouse. (After all, he liked jazz too, right?) What could not be appreciated could at least be margin- alized: the villain of The Beat Generation is a “beatnik” rapist, as though to verify Sterritt’s generalization that Hollywood has usually been “a means of containing, leveling, and rationalizing experience through modes of production and consumption that threaten no harm to dominating social forces” (40).
It must be admitted that Kerouac himself posed no threat either. He was willing to write a think-piece for Life (presumably a favorite Beat target), to be illustrated by Robert Frank, whose severe photographs—not Kerouac’s prose—led the weekly to scuttle the project. What the novelist resisted was not the bland homogeneity which the Cold War encouraged for the sake of na- tional unity but the exquisite aesthetic demands of form: “My mind is exploding to say something about every image and every memory . . . I have an irrational lust to set down everything I know” (qtd. in Sterritt 193). More is more, Kerouac believed. Burning to exceed the limits which the imperatives of structure and nuance imposed on other writers, he seemed unaffected by the low temperature of the Cold War, and could be as viscerally anti-Communist as any American Legionnaire. Far less indiffer- ent was Allen Ginsberg, the product of an Old Left home who would soon close the gap with the New Left in the 1960s. The author of “Howl” (1956) was spared conviction for obscenity because of the “redeeming social importance” which a judge de- tected in that barbaric yawp (qtd. in Sterritt 107). Its antimilita-
American Literary History 775
776 Sex and the Single Decade
rism and antimaterialism were not opinions frequently encoun- tered in the 1950s, but they were constitutionally protected. No less an augury of the next decade was Ginsberg’s “America” (1956), which instructed the country to commit an anatomically impossible act with a nuclear weapon.
“We’re talking about the Bomb, Dimitri,” the President of the US, his voice cracking, tells Soviet Premier Kissof over the telephone in Dr. Strangelove (1964). “The atomic bomb. . . .” So is Margot A. Henriksen. Starting immediately after World War II and stopping her account about three decades later, she finds fear in a handful of dust. The dread of nuclear destruction was sometimes explicit, sometimes implicit; but the mushroom cloud hovered over the nation’s culture. In Walker Percy’s The Moviegoer (1961) narrator Binx Bolling is so morbid that he feels and observes a living death, in which “the malaise has settled like fall-out.” In Catch-22, published the same year, she finds that “the probability of death and an insane bureaucratic and moral corruption were the true legacies and meaning of World War II” (247), and ignores a legacy which was outside Joseph Heller’s fictional universe: the destruction of tyranny. Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho (1960) shocked audiences into realizing that “the destruc- tion of psychological and physical sanctuary in America could not be indefinitely ignored or tranquilized away” (179). Songs about teenagers dying in automobile wrecks, like Ray Peter- son’s “Tell Laura I Love Her” (1960) and Jan and Dean’s “Dead Man’s Curve” (1964) registered not only “sensitivity to the preva- lence and possibility of death (death usually caused by technol- ogy . . .)” but also the awareness “of a cruel world” (198).
Of the four books under review, Henriksen’s is the broadest in scope, the most eclectic in its use of sources, the most ambi- tious in its claims, and the most immune to the argot of cultural studies. She draws most heavily on serious and popular novels, movies, and popular music (but stops short of political cartoons, comics, short stories, and nearly all poetry). Her use of official sources, documentaries, and polemics is often apt—from John Hersey’s indelible Hiroshima (1946) to civil defense pamphlets like The Family Fallout Shelter and Family Food Stockpile for Survival, which were distributed in millions of copies, from The Bulletin of Atomic Scientists to historical monographs like Gar Alperovitz’s Atomic Diplomacy (1965). Because she finds what she is looking for, Henriksen’s comprehensiveness, however ad- mirable, cannot avoid a certain capriciousness—thus Marvin Gaye’s “What’s Going On?” (1971) but not Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy (1957), by Henry A. Kissinger, who is omitted from the index. Very disparate material tends to be interpreted
within an important but narrow groove. Except when she is quot- ing from particular authors, the messages and meanings which she locates sound pretty much alike—and reflect passivity, anxi- ety, or resistance to the cloud under which everyone was living. Dr. Strangelove’s America: Society and Culture in the Atomic Age is lively but undiscriminating, as distinctions among genres and their (intended) audiences are flattened out, and the motives and sensibilities of the writers themselves are unconsidered.
Take Billy Wilder, since she begins with an analysis of Sun- set Boulevard (1950), a film so mordant that it is narrated by a corpse, played by William Holden, who became a star as a result. (The part had first been offered to Montgomery Clift, who might have become the most important actor of the decade had his judgment been sounder.) The deathly pall that suffuses Sunset Boulevard Henriksen ascribes to the post-Hiroshima and Naga- saki atmosphere, and the nihilism and dehumanization that she also discerns in Wilder’s The Big Carnival a year later are attrib- uted to the atomic age. But the director’s mother had only re- cently been killed in Auschwitz. Wouldn’t so personal and close a link to the death camps be sufficient to warrant a realism which his American detractors took to be cynicism? In constructing an argument for monocausality, Henriksen might have shown that anxiety, dread, or morbidity had been much less symptomatic of the nation’s arts before Los Alamos. Even had she developed her thesis more fully, other causes after 1945 would have to be weighed and then factored out—above all, the Red Menace it- self. Communism, and the intense opposition it aroused in the 1950s, barely appear in her book, despite postwar warnings that Communist Party comrades, like homosexuals, might be any- where, might be security risks, and could not be easily distin- guishable from patriots and “normal” men and women. To para- noids these enemies might be interchangeable. For instance, Robert Walker played a mincing, unmarried psychopath in Strangers on a Train in 1951 and a Communist a year later in My Son John, which had not been completed when he died in an accident. So footage from the Hitchcock thriller was seamlessly inserted.
Henriksen’s book is more about opposition to the official policies of “Dr. Strangelove” than to the theory of deterrence which Stanley Kubrick’s eponymous scientist endorses, in a comic repudiation of the Cold War mentality. Though New York Times reviewer Bosley Crowther had obtusely called Dr. Strangelove “a bit too contemptuous of our defense establish- ment for my comfort and taste,” she writes as an unabashed champion of “the culture of dissent,” of which Kubrick’s film is
American Literary History 777
778 Sex and the Single Decade
exemplary (qtd. in Henriksen 330). Devoting over a dozen pages to it, Henriksen does not miss the meaning of its title: “Only ‘strange’ forms of love and sex are practiced by these American leaders, and the very propagation of life becomes associated with death: it is the bomb, and all forms of technology, that they love” (319). Yet her book is rather inattentive to the strategic justifica- tions of the nuclear standoff, though she does briefly discuss On Thermonuclear War (1960), by Herman Kahn (a partial model for the insufficiently former Nazi whom Peter Sellers portrayed in Dr. Strangelove). Because Henriksen scants the salutary his- torical results of what has been called the “balance of terror,” she missed an opportunity to reaffirm the irony of American history by bringing the story of the Cold War to its rightful ending.
Deterrence kept Europe at peace until one side—the other side—collapsed. The either-or quandary was avoided; Western strategists were not forced to choose between surrender and nu- clear winter. In Allen Drury’s 1959 best-seller, Advise and Con- sent, Senator Fred Van Ackerman makes such a choice: “I would rather crawl to Moscow than die under a bomb” (193). One op- ponent of unilateral disarmament, Sidney Hook, disagreed. The philosopher, Henriksen writes, insisted that “Americans had to remain ‘heroic’ in keeping their anticommunist values more sa- cred than ‘life as such.”’ He offered a “moral argument for nu- clear war” (211). In fact, since the West remained resolute and the Kremlin backed away from apocalypse, his stance was vindi- cated.
What made the geopolitical victory so decisive, however, cannot be attributed to the balance of terror. The imbalance in productive capacity grew even more pronounced in the 1980s, when Soviet per capita income shrank to a tenth of the US level and was struggling to stay even with Mexico’s. Governing a country which was getting its wheat from India, Mikhail Gorba- chev eventually failed to reconcile market reform (and intellec- tual openness) with Communism, which was sandbagged by the American combination of extravagant defense spending and the allure of private consumption. With the Pentagon running the second largest planned economy on the globe, the US flaunted a huge military-industrial complex. But the USSR was a military-industrial complex, which could manufacture destruc- tive weapons but could offer little else to its own citizens. Out of power, the last Communist leader of the Soviet Union was re- duced to starring in a television commercial for Pizza Hut.
The fate of dialectical materialism could not have been fore- seen in a decade so noteworthy for its delectable materialism. The bourgeois comfort which the Beats professed to scorn as
ignoble, the “white, middle-class, suburban values” (Corber 104) which Vidal, Williams, and Baldwin sought to discredit (ac- cording to Homosexuality in Cold War America), proved resil- ient. Those values generated prosperity and served as durable goods too. The sexual tensions which engage many scholars of the 1950s were not debilitating; and somehow the demands of production and consumption, hard and soft masculinity, compe- tition and cooperation, organizational functions and the hunger for self-respect all got reconciled—or at least subordinated to the goal of higher living standards.
Consider how, in 1951, Elia Kazan solved the problem of transposing A Streetcar Named Desire (1947) to the screen, as recounted in Masked Men. On stage Blanche DuBois recalls what was wrong with her husband: “There was something different about the boy.” She sensed “a nervousness, a softness and tenderness which wasn’t like a man’s.” And then she hap- pened to discover him in a room with “an older man who had been his friend for years.” In 1951, however, homosexuality could not even be mentioned in a movie; the enforcers of the Production Code refused to allow Blanche’s husband to remain “a sex per- vert.” So what could be more shameful in a decade which con- founded Marxist expectations of a renewed crisis of capitalism? What could be powerful enough to smash a marriage when that institution was sacrosanct? The boy was too “weak” to keep a job; he was not a breadwinner (Cohan 254–55). It is almost as if Blanche had married into the Loman family. In straightening her husband out, Kazan’s film had entwined the special ideological inflections of the 1950s.

Whitfield points out that 50s conformity consisted of suppressing binaries. so blacks or gays or females had no interests apart from that of white heterosexual men. 
**Death** — Seemingly everywhere in American culture @, 776.
Defense of Deterrence — Deterrence kept Europe at peace until one side-the other
side-collapsed. The either-or- quandary was avoided;Western strategists were not forced to choose between surrender and nuclear winter.

Work Cited
Drury, Allen. Advise and Consent. 1960. Garden City: Doubleday, 1985.
American Literary History 779
