From the 1930s, other sociologists had written about the social effects of mass media and mass consumption, and The Lonely Crowd's other-directed type bore some resemblance to Erich Fromm's "marketing personality" (Fromm had been Riesman's analyst). But The Lonely Crowd made more of the way in which an older industrial culture of production and saving had given way to one of services, sales, and consumption—what Daniel Bell, a decade later, would call a "postindustrial" society.

And Riesman et al. were writing all this more than 20 years before a new phrase, "rust belt," signaled the decline of manufacturing in rich countries.

Riesman did not mean, of course, that no one made anything anymore. But making things was no longer what a growing white-collar population often talked about—or saw outside of DIY projects. The truth of this came home to me, in reverse, when driving across the country last year. Suddenly, outside the small Utah mining town of Roosevelt, we drove down a strip that was not, for once, full of stores, eateries, and offices but repair shops and small engineering works. My nostalgia was not unique. The loss of industrial culture is recognized in recent books by Richard Sennett and Matthew Crawford—and long before that by Robert Pirsig in the 1970s—calling for a return to the craftsman's virtues. Modern marketing harnesses the sense of loss by tricks of design and language, from "industrial chic" to corporate-speak that calls almost any service a "product." Even college departments sell conference events as "workshops."

The other big trend discussed by The Lonely Crowd was the rise of the "peer group," the importance of schoolfellows and contemporaries, along with the mass media, in socializing a young person. This mainly meant middle-class teenagers, as working-class youth gangs and college fraternities/sororities were not new. It was a picture of teenagers listening together to pop records or radio music—a milieu beautifully described in much the same way by Ella Leffland's novel, Rumors of Peace (1985), based on her own World War II girlhood. This was, of course, long before cellphones, the Internet, and social networking, but these features of our time support Riesman's assertion that consumer technology does not necessarily cut people off from one another. Though he thought the sociability it promoted was superficial, he differed from earlier writers on mass media, advertising, and consumption—especially Frankfurt School sociologists—who stressed the atomizing of people into self-centered buyers.

In linking cultural change to economic change, The Lonely Crowd did not limit its claims to America. The authors believed that the trends they described would eddy out through the modern world. That does not mean that they foresaw today's global capitalism. In 1949, the year the book was largely written, no one was predicting that Japan, of all countries, followed by others, would offer serious competition to America's big manufacturers, leading in turn to the rise of transnational corporate cultures. Yet The Lonely Crowd has some relevance to this new world. As Thomas Friedman describes it in The World Is Flat (2005), global business values the kind of person who is good at connecting and communicating, absorbing and using new facts, and persuading peers horizontally rather than obeying orders and dishing them out in a simple hierarchy. Global capitalism is not as devoid of tough bosses and bullies as Friedman implies, but the management skills he outlines more or less fit the other-directed type.

Global capitalism also fits, to some extent, The Lonely Crowd's picture of economic and political power. It differed here from another famous book of its time, C. Wright Mills's The Power Elite, which painted a centralized picture of power, dominated by a big-business alliance. The Lonely Crowd saw power in modern society as more pluralistic, rewarding the social skills of the other-directed. Running almost anything required negotiation among different interest groups—what Riesman called "veto groups." At Sperry during World War II, Riesman was struck by the differing "atmospheres" of Sperry's various plants as well as the conflicts and trade-offs among the company, the government, and unions. Nobody was fully in charge. The Lonely Crowd's discussion of political pluralism was focused mainly on America's national politics, but it could be applied to global capitalism with its multiple power centers. We should not exaggerate this pluralism, though. The C. Wright Mills view survives in the way an international banker elite, for instance, continues to capture huge rewards, in bad times as well as good.

Finally, one phrase from The Lonely Crowd, perhaps its most memorable, really does apply to global capitalism, especially its threat to personal rootedness and sense of place. Other-directed people, said Riesman et al., were "at home everywhere and nowhere." They forged bonds quickly but not deeply. That is why the lonely crowd was lonely and one more reason the book is still worth thinking about today.

Rupert Wilkinson is a professor emeritus of American studies and history at the University of Sussex, in England. His books include American Tough: The Tough-Guy Tradition and American Character (Greenwood Press, 1984), American Social Character: Modern Interpretations (IconEditions, 1992), and Aiding Students, Buying Students: Financial Aid in America (Vanderbilt University Press, 2005).
